Volvo to phase out traditional engines

The Swedish carmaker says all its new models will be electric or hybrid by 2019.

ColinColin

Jobs at home

A new scheme to keep Eritreans from trying to reach Europe

ColinColin

Riots and looting: my memories of Asia's financial crisis

The region has learned lessons from its financial meltdown 20 years ago, but are there other warning signs still being ignored?

ColinColin

Sport Tomic 'bored' with tennis

Bernard Tomic says he felt "bored" and could not find motivation during his straight-set defeat by Mischa Zverev at Wimbledon.

ColinColin

Criminal investigators say they are looking for evidence not only of tax fraud but organised crime.



From the section Latin America & Caribbean

ColinColin

Brazil's 'miracle' baby survives gunfight

Baby Arthur was shot when still in the womb as his mother shopped in a favela.

ColinColin

The talks come as a deadline expires for Qatar to accept a list of demands or face further sanctions.



From the section Middle East

ColinColin

Trump and his reality TV strategy

President Trump has confirmed there are no tapes of conversations with James Comey. So why pretend?

ColinColin

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Missiles fired during US-South Korea drills serve as warning to North Korea

The US and South Korea have held a ballistic missile drill, after North Korea tested a long-range missile experts believe may reach Alaska.

Self-restraint was "all that separated armistice and war" and could be changed at any time, the two allies said.

It would be a "grave mistake" for the North to think otherwise, they said.

China and Russia have urged the North to suspend its weapons programme in exchange for a halt to US-South Korean military exercises.

The launch, the latest in a series of tests, was in defiance of a ban by the UN Security Council.

The US has asked for an urgent meeting of the UNSC to discuss the issue. A closed-door session of the 15-member body will take place later on Wednesday.

Pyongyang claimed on Tuesday to have successfully tested an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM).

However, most experts believe that the North does not yet have long-range nuclear weapon capabilities.

The two Koreas are technically still at war as the 1950-1953 Korean War ended in an armistice.

How have the US and South Korea responded?

The allies conducted a ballistic missile fire exercise in the Sea of Japan.

South Korean President Moon Jae-in said the allies needed to demonstrate their missile defence posture "with action, not just a statement", his office said.

Meanwhile in a joint statement Gen Vincent Brooks, commander of US forces Korea, and South Korean Joint Chiefs Chairman Gen Lee Sun-jin said the allies were maintaining patience and self-restraint, but this could change.

"We are able to change our choice when so ordered by our alliance's national leaders. It would be a grave mistake for anyone to believe anything to the contrary," it said.

Earlier, US Secretary of State Rex Tillerson called North Korea's move a "new escalation of the threat" and warned that Washington "will never accept a nuclear-armed North Korea".

Mr Tillerson said "global action is required to stop a global threat" and warned that any nation that provided economic or military benefits to the North, or failed to fully implement UN Security Council resolutions, was "aiding and abetting a dangerous regime".

What is an ICBM?

A long-range missile usually designed to carry a nuclear warhead

The minimum range is 5,500km (3,400 miles), although most fly about 10,000km or more

Pyongyang has previously displayed two types of ICBMs: the KN-08, with a range of 11,500km, and the KN-14, with a range of 10,000km, but before 4 July had not claimed to have flight tested an ICBM. It is not clear what differentiates the Hwasong-14

North Korea's missile programme

What has North Korea said?

State news agency KCNA quoted leader Kim Jong-un as saying the test was a "gift" to the Americans on their independence day.

The report warned of the possibility of more tests, saying he ordered officials to "frequently send big and small 'gift packages' to the Yankees".

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption "One expert says the missile could reach Alaska"

Pyongyang said earlier the Hwasong-14 intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) had reached an altitude of 2,802km (1,731 miles) and flew 933km for 39 minutes before hitting a target in the sea.

North Korea, it said, was now "a full-fledged nuclear power that has been possessed of the most powerful inter-continental ballistic rocket capable of hitting any part of the world".

Does North Korea really have a long-range weapon now?

Some experts believe that Tuesday's test proves that it has a missile that could travel across the globe and reach Alaska.

Physicist David Wright said it could reach a maximum range of about 6,700km on a standard trajectory, while South Korea's defence ministry on Wednesday put the range between 7,000 and 8,000km.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption North Korean state TV announces "successful" missile test

But whether that missile could deliver a warhead is still a question.

Pyongyang claimed the rocket carried a "heavy warhead" and that it "accurately hit the targeted waters without any structural breakdown".

South Korea said there was no evidence proving the missile could withstand high temperatures and successfully re-enter the atmosphere, reported Yonhap news agency.

Experts believe Pyongyang does not yet have the capability to miniaturise a nuclear warhead, fit it onto a long-range missile, and ensure it is protected until delivery to the target.

They say many of North Korea's missiles cannot accurately hit targets.

But others believe that at the rate it is going, Pyongyang may overcome these challenges and develop a nuclear weapon that could strike the US within five to 10 years.

How advanced is North Korea's nuclear programme?

What now for Washington? - Dr John Nilsson-Wright, Chatham House

Image copyright KCNA Image caption North Korean media released this image of Tuesday's missile launch

By bringing Alaska within range, the new missile test is an unambiguous game-changer in both symbolical and practical terms.

US territory (albeit separate from the contiguous continental US) is now finally within Pyongyang's cross-hairs.

For the first time a US president has to accept that the North poses a "real and present" danger not merely to north-east Asia and America's key allies - but to the US proper.

President Trump's weakness lies in having overplayed his hand too publicly and too loudly.

Read more from Dr Nilsson-Wright.

How is the rest of the world reacting?

Japan on Tuesday said "repeated provocations like this are absolutely unacceptable" and lodged a protest.

Meanwhile China - who is Pyongyang's main economic ally - and Russia have called on North Korea to suspend its ballistic missile programme in exchange for a halt on the large-scale military exercises by the US and South Korea.

Chinese President Xi Jinping and Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin, who met in Moscow on Tuesday, said "the opposing sides should start negotiations".

ColinColin

Image copyright US House of Representatives Image caption Mr Higgins made points about US national security during his video

Officials at Auschwitz have criticised a US congressman for making and voicing a video inside a gas chamber at the former Nazi death camp.

The memorial and museum tweeted that the gas chamber was "not a stage" but was a place for mournful silence.

Republican Clay Higgins said in the video that the horrors of the WW2 death camps were the reason why the US military should be "invincible".

Some 1.1m people, mainly Jews, died at the camp in Nazi-occupied Poland.

Mr Higgins made a five-minute video showing him in different parts of the museum talking about the atrocities in the death camp.

At one point, he goes inside a gas chamber and explains how the victims are gassed.

Image copyright Twitter Image caption The museum posted a picture of the plaque outside the gas chamber building on Twitter

"This is why Homeland Security must be squared away, why our military must be invincible," he says.

But the museum responded that it was inappropriate to speak inside the gas chambers.

"Everyone has the right to personal reflections. However, inside a former gas chamber, there should be mournful silence. It's not a stage," it tweeted on Tuesday.

Later it posted a picture of the entrance to the building showing a plaque asking for silence.

Who is Clay Higgins?

A former senior policeman known as the "Cajun John Wayne" from when he hosted weekly Crime Stoppers segment of local news show

Resigned from St Landry sheriff's office for causing controversy with viral online videos

Elected as Republican congressman in December 2016 for Louisiana's third district, in a shock result in the wake of Donald Trump's presidential victory

Reacted to London Bridge terror attack in June by saying that Christians were "at war with Islamic horror" and calling for all radical Islamists to be hunted down and killed

The Louisiana congressman has not yet responded to the criticism. His offices were closed for the Fourth of July holiday.

However, the video was not being displayed on his website and social media users suggested it had been removed.

Some Twitter users reacted with fury.

Image copyright Twitter

ColinColin

Living in smog-filled Beijing in China

Pupils from a school in Beijing have sent us a special report about how they are dealing with the thick smog which has brought China's capital to a standstill.

ColinColin

What's behind the India-China border stand-off?

The two countries have been locked in a month-long dispute along part of their shared border.

ColinColin

Video

The US and South Korea have conducted a joint military exercise a day after North Korea launched a missile experts believe could reach Alaska.

In a joint statement, military officials warned that "self-restraint, which is a choice, is all that separates armistice and war" and that their drills showed "we are able to change our choice".

ColinColin

Video

Emergency services in Austria had a busy morning after a lorry shed its load of live birds.

The incident closed the motorway heading towards Vienna and caused long traffic jams in the other direction as drivers slowed down to look.

ColinColin

Living in smog-filled Beijing in China

Pupils from a school in Beijing have sent us a special report about how they are dealing with the thick smog which has brought China's capital to a standstill.

ColinColin

Biafrans still dream of independence

It is more than four decades since the end of the civil war in Nigeria which saw the army fighting to stop the east of the country, known as Biafra, from breaking away.

ColinColin

May: Account of dinner is 'Brussels gossip'

Prime Minister Theresa May dismisses reports of how a dinner went between herself and EC President Jean-Claude Juncker as "Brussels gossip".

ColinColin

Image copyright Reuters Image caption North Korean state TV released photos of the purported ICBM test launch

Whatever the precise range and capability of North Korea's latest ballistic missile test, there is no doubt that it is making steady progress towards its goal of having a nuclear-capable missile, able to threaten the continental US.

That term "nuclear capable" is important. Pyongyang must both miniaturise a nuclear warhead to fit on the head of a missile and be able to protect it against all the buffeting and forces as it re-enters the earth's atmosphere.

We do not know precisely where the North Koreans stand in this aspect of their programme. But it is possible that North Korea will achieve its goal during the Trump presidency.

This then throws a spotlight on the US ability to defend against such an attack. Huge quantities of money have been invested in ballistic missile defence. There is a global network of satellite sensors and relays able to spot and track a missile launch. Interceptor missiles are already in place.

But critics believe that the US system is far from reliable. The Trump administration is reviewing the whole programme. New generations of interceptor missiles are coming on stream. But in the foreseeable future, only a handful will be available to deal with the potential North Korean threat.

Image copyright AFP/Getty Image caption Israel's missile defence system has proved effective against the rockets it has faced

We are a long way from the "Star Wars" dream of President Ronald Reagan, who hoped for the construction of a missile-proof shield over the US and its allies. In those days ballistic missile defences were seen by many as destabilising.

That is why there was a Cold War treaty largely banning them. They would threaten the certainty of a retaliatory nuclear attack getting through, thus increasing the likelihood of a no-warning onslaught, in turn decreasing the effectiveness of nuclear deterrence.

Missile defence viewed as part of the strategic equation between two nuclear-armed superpowers is one thing. Some argued that even a less-than-effective defensive system would alter an opponent's calculations.

But very quickly the idea of a missile-proof screen - like a comic book Captain America's shield protecting the continental US - was seen as science fiction if not fantasy. It would be too expensive and the technology simply did not exist.

Image copyright AFP/Getty Image caption Surface-to-air missiles have been deployed outside Japan's defence ministry

Scroll forward a few decades and the threat that missile defence is now ranged against is very different. It is not - despite Russian protests - aimed at weakening Russia's nuclear forces. It is designed to protect against a very specific threat - from Iran or North Korea's developing missile arsenals.

Against this kind of threat, the requirement is not simply to alter an adversary's strategic calculations, but to stop each and every missile getting through.

Technology has advanced dramatically with some of the most significant strides being made by Israel. Its interceptor systems and their associated radars - funded in large part by the US - have shown themselves spectacularly successful, even though against a full-scale onslaught even Israel's system would be sorely tested.

Image copyright Reuters Image caption The Thaad defence system will take out missiles considered a threat to South Korea

In contrast the US's own defensive system, according to many critics, is not yet up to the job. Testing has provided mixed results. And there are frequent criticisms that even the most elaborate tests are not conducted in ways which fully resemble real-world conditions.

Even US commanders accept that their defences are not fully missile-proof and that they might quickly be overwhelmed if a country possessed a sizeable arsenal of missiles.

Whatever President Trump decides to do about North Korea and the growing reach of its missiles, time is running out.

One option he may pursue is to step up the US's own defences, just as he has deployed interceptor missiles in South Korea to try to enhance its defences against missile attack.

ColinColin

Image copyright Getty Images

It's hard to forget that first rude awakening when you realise what others really think of your country.

For me, it was February 1988.

There I was, living in the great city of London, after I finally obtained a work permit.

And there it was, in black and white in a British newspaper covering the Winter Olympics in the western Canadian city of Calgary.

"One of the world's coldest countries in winter excels in its sports". And, the columnist wrote, if there was an Olympics for being boring, Canada would also win gold.

A gold medal for boredom? How could that be? For years, that's what I heard about Canada.

Look what they write now.

The Lonely Planet Travel Guide's top destination this year? Canada.

Image copyright Getty Images

And last year, the New York Times Style section asked "Canada is suddenly... hip?"

The notion, it wrote, that "our neighbour to the north is a frozen cultural wasteland populated with hopelessly unstylish citizens is quickly becoming so outdated to be almost offensive".

Exactly.

For the writer, and Lonely Planet, this sudden volte-face had a lot to do with what was described as the "muscular, blue-eyed social media savvy son of former Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau".

It is true that Justin Trudeau, whose Liberal Party swept back into power in October 2015, has sent Canada rocketing up the charts.

It's partly because of his willingness to take selfies, and take off his shirt while jogging, surfing, canoeing, you name it.

But he has also been taking to every global stage: talking about a Canada committed to climate change; personally welcoming Syrian refugees he calls "new Canadians;" and giving President Donald Trump the strongest of handshakes while still trying to strengthen Canada's relationship with its most vital trading partner.

I often get asked about Canada's Prime Minister. "He's the right leader," asserted an Italian businesswoman when I recently visited northern Italy.

Then, pausing, she added, "but of course you need the right people too".

Image copyright Reuters

Everyone around our lunch table nodded in agreement. A marketing executive offered a description of Canadians - "smart, caring, forward looking".

Then, searching for exactly the right word, she exclaimed - "Nice!" Everyone around the table nodded vigorously.

Nice, polite, friendly. You hear that description a lot. Is that a new way to say boring?

I'm never sure you can describe an entire nation, in this case nearly thirty six million people, in the same way. But, even I notice when I go to Canada, how friendly people are - even in the lifts, or should I say elevators?

"How was your day? You have a nice evening planned for tonight?" strangers inquire as doors open and shut.

Even before 45-year-old Justin Trudeau emerged as Canada's poster boy, global indexes gave my country high marks.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Why are these top athletes still seeking recognition?

Take just one. In 2015, the Reputation Index, an annual survey ranking developed nations, called Canada the "most admired" for its "effective government, absence of corruption, welfare support system," and yes, its "friendly and welcoming people".

Year in, year out, major Canadian cities are rated as among the most liveable in the world.

Even so, Canada's place on the world stage has definitely shifted.

"The new prime minister and his Liberal Party have made a difference," explains a prominent Canadian journalist when I ask why that is.

"But don't forget they are the embodiment of what Canadians voted for."

That has included accepting more than 30,000 Syrian refugees, with half of them sponsored by citizens who clubbed together to support the new families. There's also been a gender balanced cabinet and, most recently a new "feminist foreign aid policy."

Canada also played a key role in clinching the Paris accord on climate change, and is seeking a return to a version of the peacekeeping Canada played a key role creating in the 1950s.

None are without criticism at home, but all have been popular - in Canada and beyond.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Welcome to Tilt Cove, population - four

Of course, Canada is blessed by geography too. The world's second biggest land mass, surrounded by three oceans and a border with the United States, has always been able to select and screen its immigrants, rather than seeing them show up on its shores. Or at least that was the case until some refugees, fleeing new restrictions in the United States, started crossing the border.

As Canadian students, we learn that our country is a mosaic of many peoples, and our neighbour to the south is a melting pot.

But what we didn't study enough, and our governments didn't do enough about, is a subject being focused on as never before - the troubled history of Canada's indigenous peoples who've been on the land for more than 10,000 years.

They're not happy with all the fuss and fanfare about Canada's 150th birthday when land rights, as well as economic conditions and social justice, are still major issues.

Image copyright Getty Images

"Global recognition of Canada has certainly increased," Dr Annis May Timpson, an Oxford University professor and leading UK expert on Canadian politics, including its indigenous peoples.

"I hope it will look beyond the celebration of 150 years of Confederation to take a lead globally to ensure full and effective reconciliation with all its indigenous communities."

A nation forged in 1867 from British colonies, and former French ones, is still redefining its identity.

The language divide, which once threatened to tear Canada apart, is no longer a burning political issue between the predominantly French speaking province of Quebec and the rest of Canada.

But Canadians still have lots to debate - from how a major oil producer should tackle climate change, to which ice hockey team is the best, and whether the prime minister should be photo bombing unsuspecting high school prom-goers.

Whatever it is, it is never boring.

More on Canada at 150

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Highclere Castle - which is Downton Abbey - played a key part in the formation of Canada

What does it mean to be Canadian today?

What's in store for Canada's next 150 years?

As Canada celebrates its 150th anniversary, BBC World News will explore this vast country throughout July - from discovering some of the most remote places in Canada on The Travel Show to documentary-style programming in Canada Stories.

To mark this occasion, we are offering Canadian audiences the chance to watch BBC World News as a free channel preview. More details here.

ColinColin

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Trump's history with wrestling goes back at least a decade

On Saturday, Donald Trump tweeted that he's redefining the social media behaviour of a "modern-day" president. On Sunday he once again proved it.

Mr Trump's CNN-wrestling video, apparently cribbed from a user on the internet message board Reddit, may be unfamiliar commentary coming from the chief executive of the US, but it's classic Trump.

He has shown time and time again that he views politics as performance art; another reality television competition where the more drama and conflict there is, the better.

Candidate Trump belittled his Republican opponents - Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz, Rand Paul and company - then shrugged it off as part of the game. He turned Hillary Clinton, whom he had once praised and buddied around with at his wedding, into a "crooked" caricature who should be shipped off to prison.

He portrayed the media, and CNN in particular, as cartoon villains that he can rhetorically beat into submission.

Mr Trump's choice of a professional wrestling clip for his latest tweet was particularly apt, as throughout his campaign he treated the political process like a World Wrestling Entertainment match. The drama is contrived; the action is fake; the outcome predetermined.

He pulled back the curtain on the show and laughed along with his supporters at the spectacle. He encouraged his crowds to cheer the hero (him) and berate the villains (everyone else).

Journalists - corralled in their pens - were often singled out for derision, and his adoring legions would turn and jeer, shaking their fists, but also, for the most part, enjoying themselves.

On more than one occasion while covering Mr Trump's campaign, I would have a friendly conversation with someone at his rally - an elderly woman in a homemade Trump t-shirt in Virginia or a leather-jacket-clad rancher in Nevada - then watch as they heartily booed me and my colleagues at Mr Trump's prompting.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Are President Trump's attacks on the media undermining the news?

The press, like Mr Trump's opponents on the debate stage, were all part of his performance; the black-clad villains in his show.

Some in the media have rushed to condemn Mr Trump's wrestling tweet as a thinly-veiled threat of violence against the media. CNN issued a statement calling it a "sad day" and asserting deputy White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders lied earlier in the week when she said the president had never "promoted or encouraged violence".

Such imagery coming from the president of the US will certainly harshen the level of discourse in the nation, and there is the not insignificant possibility that some may view it as a call for violence.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption 'I want to upset people', says the Progressive Liberal, an anti-Trump wrestler

Most, however, will see it as the president probably intended - the latest episode in the biggest show ever to hit the US political scene; a new plot twist to keep the audience entertained.

As Mr Trump said in a speech lashing out against his media critics on Saturday night: "I'm president, and they're not."

Donald Trump played by his rules and won. He's going to keep reminding us that it's not the same game anymore.

Welcome to the modern presidency.

ColinColin

Image caption

A Libyan coastguard looks down at the occupants of a boat during the rescue of 147 illegal migrants attempting to reach Europe off the coastal town of Zawiyah, 45km west of the capital Tripoli.

ColinColin

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Police commando Herojit has admitted to more than 100 unlawful killings. Warning: This video contains distressing images

More than 1,500 people were allegedly killed in a wave of extra-judicial executions by security forces in India's insurgency-ridden north-eastern Manipur state between 1979 and 2012. Last year, in a landmark ruling, the Supreme Court asked relatives of the victims and activists to collect information on the killings. The court will rule in July whether to order an official investigation which could lead to convictions. Soutik Biswas travelled to Manipur to find out more.

Neena Ningombam vividly remembers the day her husband disappeared - and ended up a corpse on cable news.

It was a bright, sunny November day in 2008, and 32-year-old Michael was visiting a friend's house in Imphal, the non-descript, mountain-ringed valley capital of Manipur.

At home, Ms Ningombam was doing her chores. Her two boys were fast asleep. At half past three in the afternoon, her mobile phone rang.

Michael was on the line saying that he had been picked up by police commandos on his way home, and that she should quickly pass on the news of his arrest to a senior policeman who was known to the family so that he could help secure his release.

The call disconnected abruptly. Two hours later, a man finally picked up the phone and told Ms Ningombam that her husband was "in the toilet". He said he would inform him that she had called.

Michael never called. When she tried calling again, his phone was switched off.

Tense and confused, Ms Ningombam sat down in front of the TV. Her sister-in-law had gone in search of the police officer known to the family, but he couldn't be found.

Manipur: Insurgent hotspot

Image copyright Getty Images

Manipur, a hilly north-eastern state on the border with Myanmar (Burma), has been a cauldron of insurgency for more than four decades.

At one point, the state was home to some 30 armed groups. Six main groups are outlawed.

The violence is stoked by ethnic rivalries, and demands for independence and affirmative action for local tribespeople. Some rebel groups also act as social watchdogs, targeting liquor sellers, drug traffickers and banning Bollywood films. Lack of jobs has worsened matters.

According to the government, 1,214 civilians were killed by insurgents between 2000 and October 2012. Also, 365 police and soldiers were killed by insurgents during the same period.

A controversial anti-insurgent law, the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (Afspa) - which protects security forces who may kill a civilian by mistake or in unavoidable circumstances - has been in effect here since 1958 and been partly blamed for the "perpetual immunity" enjoyed by the forces.

In July 2016, the Supreme Court remarked that the law could not be an excuse for retaliatory killings and excesses.

So she waited, and waited, for Michael, watching the news on a local channel. At nine in the evening, the screen exploded with breaking news.

They were showing footage of her bloodied husband, wearing blue nylon tracksuit bottoms and a dark green T-shirt, lying dead on a stone floor. A Chinese-made grenade lay next to the body. The news reader breathlessly announced that police commandos had killed another militant.

Ms Ningombam says she looked at the screen and froze. Grief felt so like fear itself.

"I just remember that I cried and cried and cried. Someone came rushing in and yanked off the TV cable wire. My brother-in-law went to the morgue and identified him."

Image copyright Varun Nayar Image caption The police defended the killing of Michael Ningombam

The post-mortem report said Michael Ningombam had died of "shock and haemorrhage as a result of firearm injuries to lungs and liver".

The police said Michael and two friends were riding a motorcycle when they were stopped by half a dozen vehicle-borne commandos in a wooded area on the outskirts of the city. The pillion rider was said to have fired at the vehicle and Michael apparently tried to throw a grenade at the commandos who then shot and killed him in an act of self-defence. The police also said Michael was a militant and extortionist.

"My husband was struggling, doing odd jobs. He was a drug user and he was trying to kick the habit. But he was not a militant," Ms Ningombam , 40, told me. They had met in college, fallen in love, eloped and married.

The neighbourhood had erupted in protests after the killing, demanding an investigation.

Ms Ningombam, who holds a masters degree in history, took up a driving school job to support her sons. She also single-handedly launched an arduous battle for justice, filing official complaints, petitioning the government and the court, collecting papers and coaxing a key potential witness to testify.

Every day, for more than a month, she would drive 15km (9 miles) on her scooter to the wooded city outskirts where an ageing shop-owner had spotted the commandos drive by in a SUV with her husband on the afternoon of the killing. Then he had heard the sound of gunfire in the distance.

"After days of coaxing him and interacting with his family, the old man consented to testify and became a key witness. That is how we sometimes get some justice in Manipur. The state doesn't help you," she said.

Image copyright Varun Nayar Image caption Kamalini Ngangban's son Naoba was killed outside the family home in 2009

Four years later, in July 2012, the district judge, in a report, concluded on the basis of evidence that Michael had been killed by Manipur police commandos and that there had "been no exchange of fire" between the policemen and the victim.

The high court accepted the report, and ordered that 500,000 rupees ($7,759; £6,115) should be paid in compensation to Ms Ningombam.

Michael Ningombam was not alone in meeting such a fate. Rights groups believe as many as 1,528 people were unlawfully executed - also known as fake encounters - in Manipur between 1979 and 2012.

The overwhelming majority of the victims were men, many of them lower income and unemployed. Among those killed were 98 minors and 31 women. The oldest was an 82-year-old woman; the youngest, a 14-year-old girl.

'Climate of impunity'

The most well-known victim was Thangjam Manorama Devi, 32, who was allegedly gang raped and murdered by paramilitary soldiers in 2004, provoking a unique nude protest by mothers and grandmothers that stunned the world.

Some of the killings have been investigated by a federal human rights organisation. Judicial inquiries have resulted in compensation for a few hundred victims' families. But what is unsettling is that not a single policeman or soldier has been put on trial in connection with the killings.

"People have been picked up, called insurgents and killed. The climate of impunity means the police often don't register cases. You have to fix accountability. You cannot just suspend the right to live and kill people," says Babloo Loitongbam, a prominent human rights activist.

Eight years ago, the families of the victims joined hands with activists to do something about this "culture of impunity enjoyed by the police, army and paramilitaries". On a July morning in 2009, they gathered in a room in Imphal, shared their stories and starkly christened themselves the Extrajudicial Execution Victim Families Association.

Image copyright Varun Nayar Image caption The Extra Judicial Victim Families Association works out of a single-room office in Imphal

Last July, responding to a petition filed by the families, the Supreme Court, in a landmark judgement, asked the petitioners to collect more information about the alleged murders. Even if the investigations revealed that the victim was an "enemy and an unprovoked aggressor", the judges said, it had to be determined whether "excessive or retaliatory force was used to kill the enemy".

So the newly empowered civilian "investigators" put out adverts and appeals in the local media, and began gathering information - and potential evidence - on the killings.

Some 900 families responded, bringing with them police complaints, post-mortem reports, funeral records and court orders related to killings. Volunteers - students, relatives of victims - spread out to each of the nine districts of the hilly state, collecting information. A local lawyer, working pro bono, helped with the legal work.

A year later, a dozen grey filing cabinets in the office were overflowing with more than 1,500 files, each devoted to a killing. In April, the victims handed over details of 748 killings to the court even as they worked on other cases. Sometime this month, the top court is expected to rule on investigating these cases.

Banal horror

The banal horror of death in Manipur is possibly unequalled in India. "It takes us a long time to raise our children. Then, when they grow up, they are shot. This cannot go on. We no longer want to look for our children in the morgue," a women's rights activist in the state once said.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption There have been countrywide protests against the alleged killings in Manipur

Men disappeared or were picked up by security forces while going to the market to buy fertiliser for their farms, parts for cars, to rent a DVD or while waiting for a passenger bus. Others were killed on their way to meet girlfriends, while fishing in a lake, or simply having food in a restaurant. A woman was shot while she was feeding her baby girl.

Sometimes, security forces would simply break into homes, drag out suspects in front of their families and kill them.

That is what happened to Ngangban Naoba Singh, a 29-year-old theology student, on a still summer night in May 2009.

Naoba had returned home with his sister from a wedding late in the evening. The two were watching a film on TV, when their mother, Kamalini Ngangban, a retired census worker, joined her children.

"These late-night movies are not meant for elders. Go to sleep," Naoba joked.

Those were his last words.

Around midnight, Ms Ngangban woke up to "violent knocking on the door". Then she heard voices. Some people were trying to enter the house.

She rushed to her son's bedroom and woke him up, and tried to take him out of the back door. Did she think that they had coming looking for her son?

"I knew something was wrong. Naoba was so sleepy, I don't think he realised what was going on.

"The moment we stepped out of the back door, someone stopped us."

She saw silhouettes in the moonlight. She thought she saw 10 of them.

'Stop him!'

One man shouted at Naoba: "Where are you going?" He said his mother had asked him to come out.

Things quickly spiralled out of control in the dark.

The men "took away" Naoba, his parents were pushed back into the house, their phones were removed and the doors bolted from outside.

There was an exchange of words, some orders were barked out, and then shots rang out in the darkness.

"Stop him! Stop him!" somebody screamed. A vehicle was starting up behind the house.

Ms Ngangban hoped her son had managed to run away. It was pitch dark, and the family was confined inside the house for the rest of the night. When dawn broke, they found out that her son had been killed in their backyard and his body taken away in a vehicle.

Image caption More than 1,500 people have been allegedly executed unlawfully in Manipur

"Even today, I don't know why he was murdered. I want to know the truth. If we did something wrong and tried to escape, they could have shot him in the leg," she says.

"You know, he was my favourite son. We used to go to the theatre together. My two other children live and work outside Manipur. Naoba was supposed to be the man of the house."

The police said they had cordoned off the house that night to search for Naoba, who they said was a member of an outlawed rebel group and an extortionist.

Three years later, a judicial inquiry report ruled there was no evidence to show he was either.

The judge ruled the police commandos had fired "indiscriminately without any attempt to arrest Naoba by following the rule of law prevailing in this democratic country". The Supreme Court is now hearing the case, and is to decide on compensating the family.

Staying at home was no guarantee that your life was secure. Oinam Amina Devi, for example, was shot by paramilitary soldiers while she was feeding her one-month-old baby girl in her house in April 1996.

The soldiers had chased a suspected rebel who had run into her tin-roof village home and hidden under the bed. Amina, who was on the veranda, panicked and ran inside with her baby when she saw the soldiers running in. When she tried to shut the door, the soldiers opened fire. A bullet pierced her and exited, then entered her baby.

'Unprovoked killing'

The bleeding daughter was taken to hospital where surgeons removed the bullet. Her mother died instantly.

There were demonstrations in the area and the family refused to accept Amina's body after the post mortem. Her corpse was taken back to the police station and later cremated. Under pressure, the government announced an inquiry.

The investigation concluded that the firing was "unprovoked, unwarranted and indiscriminate". The government submitted the report to the Supreme Court and the family received a compensation of 50,000 rupees.

Today, the daughter, Oinam Sunita Devi, 20, lives with her father who married again.

"I cannot explain my sadness. I miss my mother and I sometimes wonder how I survived. This is my fate," she says.

Image copyright Varun Nayar Image caption Oinam Sunita Devi (right) was hit by a bullet fired by soldiers which killed her mother and now lives with her father (left)

The police and security forces have, for the most part, maintained that the encounters are genuine and the victims were militants killed in counter-insurgency or anti-terror operations.

The government told the top court last year that some "5,000 militants were holding some 2.3 million people of Manipur to ransom and keeping people in constant fear". It said 365 police and paramilitaries had been killed by the rebels between 2000 and October 2012.

But things have become murkier after a police commando Herojit Singh admitted to journalists in January last year that he had shot dead an unarmed, suspected rebel inside a bustling Imphal market in 2009. In a chilling interview in July he admitted to killing more than 100 people and that he kept a "tally of his kills" in notebooks.

When I met him last month in a hotel room in the city, the 36-year-old policeman, son of a government worker, said he was battling depression. He said he hadn't slept at all at night for two years. He had also survived a road accident in the city; many feel someone may have tried to kill him as he had made too many enemies.

'No remorse'

When I asked him how many people he had killed, he said: "I don't remember the details."

"Was it more than 100 people?" I asked.

"Yes."

He said he felt no remorse for the killings, and he was ready to face any punishment.

"I was simply doing my duty and following the orders of my seniors. I confessed because I thought it was important to tell the truth," he said.

Life has been difficult after his confession. Detectives from the federal Central Bureau of Investigation are investigating the killing of 23-year-old Chungkham Sanjit in the market and questioned the commando more than 10 times. Herojit Singh has been suspended a number of times for "indiscipline and grave misconduct", and then reinstated.

By day, he spends time with his children, helping them with their homework. When his pet chicken fell ill recently, he says he panicked, clasped it to his chest and ran with it to the vet.

Image copyright Varun Nayar Image caption Leitanthem Priya Leika's husband Premananda was killed on his way to the market to buy timber in 2006

Nights are brutal. "I dread nights. I wish I had my own sun, which I could put in the sky and there would never be any darkness," he says.

Yumnam Joykumar Singh, the former chief of Manipur police, and now the deputy chief minister of a newly-elected government ruling the state, says Herojit Singh is exaggerating his role in the killings.

"He's bluffing. He was possibly involved in 10-15 encounters. But he's claiming he has killed so many people. Let the courts ask him how many cases he was present in."

Mr Singh, who earned a reputation for being a firm and unyielding policeman, says rights groups are exaggerating the number of fake encounters.

'Fire your weapon'

"There might have been a few cases [of] extra-judicial killings, but I don't think the numbers being quoted are that many. If 1,500 people had been killed illegally, there would have been more protests in the state," he told me.

During his time as the chief of police, Mr Singh beefed up the force - from 20,000 to 34,000 policemen - and made it "the leading force" to fight insurgents. He said militancy and extortion had led to a near-collapse of public order in the state, and he told his policemen: "If you have a weapon, you can fire back."

"That is how we fought the insurgency."

Bringing up the dead is not easy. Memories fade. Potential evidence - post mortem reports, police complaints - yellow and crumble with age. Hope waxes and wanes. Time heals wounds, but also allows for reflection, and gives you renewed purpose.

So, emboldened by the Supreme Court's intervention, the families of victims in Manipur have plunged into an unexpectedly fierce fight for justice, in many cases years after they lost their loved ones. The killings have stopped, but there have been no punishments for the crimes yet.

The families have stirred with a newly-found collective courage, not because they have great hope in an egregious and slow-moving criminal justice system.

Many say they don't want their children and families to be permanently tainted by fake allegations about their fathers, brothers, sons, daughters and wives. They know the crimes and misdemeanours of a family member can easily taint all born within it.

"I kept fighting because of my sons. I don't want people to call them children of a militant. I had to clear my dead husband's name to protect them," says Ms Neena Nongmaithem.

"And, yes, the dead should not be completely forgotten."

Pictures by Varun Nayar and Karen Dias

ColinColin

Image copyright Facebook - Natalie Hage Image caption In sharing her experience, Hage said: "This is a fat person's daily reality"

A plus-size US model has been widely praised for confronting a passenger accused of sending "mean and ugly" messages about her during a flight.

Natalie Hage, who was travelling to Los Angeles for a photo shoot, said that in one of the texts, he wrote to a friend that the flight would not take off because of her weight.

In another, he said: "I think she ate a Mexican."

The man later apologised, saying he had had a few drinks before boarding.

Ms Hage shared the incident, which happened on Thursday, on social media. A video of the exchange has been watched more than a million times.

Ms Hage, who described herself as being "extremely flight anxious", said she had paid $70 (£54) for additional space "because I know I need a little extra leg room" but that there were only middle seats available.

"As soon as I sat down, the gentleman on my left began LOUDLY huffing, sighing, and readjusting himself in his seat," she wrote on a post on Instagram.

Then, Ms Hage said, she noticed that he was sending text messages to a friend about her.

"[The recipient] says 'Hopefully she didn't have any Mexican food' and his response is 'I think she ate a Mexican'. Then he proceeds to say he's leaving a 'neck mark on the window' because he's so smashed against the wall."

Image copyright Instagram - Nataliemeansnice Image caption Hage's account of the experience has been praised on social media

She said she asked the man on her right to change seats, telling him what had happened, but that he laughed and refused.

"This is a fat person's daily reality and not just on a plane. This is on a bus, standing in line at the grocery store, at a concert, on the internet. You can be completely in your own space, not bothering anyone, and people will still f*** with you and try to hurt you.

"All you can do is know you haven't done anything wrong just by existing and to move on."

You might also like

Later, she confronted the passenger, and posted a video of it on Facebook, and the post has been liked by more than 7,000 people. In the video, he apologised. But he later said she should not sit on the emergency row as she would be unfit to help people out.

When she cited one of the messages he allegedly sent, he laughed. "Don't ever treat somebody like that again," she told him.

On Facebook, Ms Hage has been widely praised for her "courage" and for being a "brave woman".

ColinColin

Image copyright Thean Hou Temple Image caption Chinese sea goddess Mazu went viral after she was seen travelling in business class

Images of three revered Chinese deity statues went viral on social media after they were seen travelling in business class on a flight from China's port city of Xiamen to the Malaysian capital Kuala Lumpur. But what is the story behind it?

Who are the divine passengers?

The first was the Chinese sea goddess Mazu (also known as Matsu), widely worshipped in southern China as well as countries with large Taoist and Chinese Buddhist communities such as Malaysia, Vietnam and Taiwan.

She is a patroness of the sea and is believed to protect fishermen and sailors.

Image copyright Thean Hou Temple

The other two statues are Qianliyan and Shunfeng'er, heavenly guardians of the goddess.

Qianliyan is known for his powers of far-sightedness while the demon Shunfeng'er possesses the incredible ability to hear all sounds carried by the wind, a role believed to aid sailors and passing ships from advancing storms.

Why were they in business class?

The three statues were sent to Malaysia and Singapore as part of an inaugural cultural exchange tour to pay tribute to the sea goddess and celebrate a festival in her name. It was organised by the Meizhou Mazu Ancestor Temple in China.

Image copyright Thean Hou Temple Image caption Amused Chinese netizens wondered how Mazu and her divine entourage made it through airport security

Photos being widely circulated on Chinese social media showed the statues leaving their coastal temple home and "checking in" at Xiamen Gaoqi International Airport.

"How did she get through security checks?" asked amused user Tong Huichun on the popular WeChat messaging app.

"It's normal for Mazu to give a tour. It's too far away so she's taking a flight. Taking a boat will take too long," said another WeChat user Gong Chang.

Temple staff told BBC News that the religious statues were escorted by "a delegation of more than 130 people" and brought onto a Xiamen Airlines flight heading to Kuala Lumpur International Airport.

Image copyright Thean Hou Temple Image caption Fasten those safety belts! Turbulence on board was one worry for the religious statues

They flew in comfort in business class, on tickets costing 2,091 yuan (£237) each.

With assistance from airline staff, devotees fastened the sacred statues into first row seats and "widened" them to allow more space.

Taking turbulence into consideration, the statues' feet were firmly fixed onto the seats with special harnesses.

Image copyright Xiamen Airlines Image caption Even gods and goddesses need their boarding passes

"This is basic respect we have for the culture of Goddess Mazu," said a spokesperson who received the statues in Malaysia. "They were also more than 6ft high, so they had to fly business class."

They even had special passports, which staff from the temple said were a "special courtesy" provided by the airline.

Journey to the South: Where were they travelling from?

The statues came from a sacred sea temple located off the shores of Fujian province, known to its worshippers as being the birthplace of goddess Mazu.

They travelled more than 2,800km to another temple, the Thean Hou Chinese Temple in Malaysia.

Image copyright Thean Hou Temple Image caption Sea goddess Mazu seen leaving her coastal temple in Meizhou, China

Temple staff highlighted the importance of their voyage.

"This is the body of our divine goddess, a symbol of Chinese folk culture," a representative told BBC News, adding that processions were held to celebrate the statues' safe arrivals.

All three statues have made their way to neighbouring Malacca city and are on their way to Singapore. They will then return to their home in China.

ColinColin

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption "One expert says the missile could reach Alaska"

North Korea's confident announcement that it has successfully launched an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) capable of striking the US is another iteration in the high stakes game of international poker that Pyongyang appears to excel at.

Carefully timed to coincide with the 4 July holidays in the US, Kim Jong-un's triumphal blast has simultaneously allowed the North Korean authoritarian leader to make good on his promises of military modernisation to his own people while exposing the hollow overconfident tweets of President Donald Trump that an ICBM launch "won't happen".

The launch of the North's Hwasong-14 rocket is in practical terms merely an incremental step forward from an earlier launch in May, when a similar rocket flew for 30 minutes, to a height of some 1,312 miles (2,111km) over a distance of some 489 miles.

The most recent missile added seven to nine minutes of flight time, an extra 400 miles or so in height and a further 88 miles in overall distance.

Image copyright KCNA/via REUTERS Image caption North Korea's media released a photo purportedly showing Kim Jong-un (right) celebrating the test

Superficially this is simply more of the same pattern of provocation and tactical sabre-rattling that the North has been pursuing for decades, whether through its longstanding quest to acquire nuclear weapons (dating from the 1960s) or its missile testing programme, sharply accelerated in the course of last year.

Yet, by bringing Alaska within range, the new test is an unambiguous game-changer in both symbolical and practical terms.

US territory (albeit separate from the contiguous continental US) is now finally within Pyongyang's cross-hairs and for the first time a US president has to accept that the North poses a "real and present" danger not merely to north-east Asia and America's key allies - but to the US proper.

Image copyright AFP/Getty Images Image caption How would Donald Trump respond to the North's latest test?

President Trump's weakness lies in having overplayed his hand too publicly and too loudly.

His initial gambit of deploying a US "armada" to the region in the form of the USS Carl Vinson battle group, not only involved a poor use of historical analogies (the ill-fated 16th Century Spanish fleet was probably the least auspicious of reference points), but also signally failed to intimidate the North Koreans.

Similarly, openly pressuring the Chinese to impose punitive sanctions on North Korea in return for economic restraint from the US through a Trumpian concession not to list Beijing as a currency manipulator also appears to have failed.

President Xi, notwithstanding the positive mood music of the April Mar-a-Lago summit, appears to have avoided being boxed in by Trump, and China's reaction to the North's latest provocation is likely to be limited to a familiar pattern of rhetorical condemnation and a call for calm from all parties.

Washington's immediate options are limited.

Military action - notwithstanding the hawkish recommendations of Republican senators such as John McCain and Lindsay Graham - is next to impossible given the risks involved to Seoul and the poor prospects of success, either in terms of removing the North's strategic assets or its political leadership.

Sanctions are likely to be revisited, through a reconvening of the UN Security Council, but the political process is slow and enforcement is at best a partial and therefore ineffectual approach.

Image copyright Reuters Image caption North Korean state TV released photos of Tuesday's missile launch

Talks are one way forward and the convergence of views between Washington and Seoul on the back of President Moon's recent visit to the US suggest that some sort of partial re-engagement with the North might be on the cards, albeit within a framework of reinforced deterrence.

Yet, for now the momentum is all with Pyongyang, which has little incentive to sit down with the US and can afford to play for time in accelerating its military modernisation efforts while capitalising on divisions within the international community.

While the US, South Korean and Japanese leaders will be united in pushing for tough measures at this week's G20 summit in Germany, they will be hard pressed to secure the support of either China or Russia for anything beyond a bland, condemnatory declaration.

The dangers of the present crisis are two-fold.

A more confident Kim Jong-un, emboldened by his latest success may become less risk-averse, engaging in conventional military brinkmanship which, while not going as far as pre-emptive attacks on his neighbours, might spill over into conflict through miscalculation rather than through design.

Alternatively, the US confronted by the unpalatable reality of seeing the North cross yet another supposedly non-negotiable "red line" may simply choose to avert its eyes.

For a president wedded to his own version of "fake news", the easiest way to cope with an inconvenient truth may be to redefine or simply ignore the original "red line".

This would be a major mistake since it will do nothing to deter the North while encouraging other states in the region to pursue their own military modernisation plans, storing up even greater problems for the future.

Ultimately, Mr Trump, if he wishes to demonstrate that he is indeed master of the "art of the deal", will need to give up the bully pulpit of megaphone diplomacy via twitter and pivot towards a more enlightened approach.

This could involve the imaginative despatch of a high-profile US senior statesman to negotiate with and appeal to the ego and amour propre of the young North Korean leader.

It could also involve closer co-ordination with America's allies, most notably South Korea, in offering some high-profile political concessions to the North - whether the establishment of a US liaison mission in Pyongyang or a sequenced pattern of asymmetric conventional force reductions on the peninsula.

Right now, Washington (for the sake of the region and the wider world) urgently needs a long-term, sustained and calibrated strategy for dealing with the North that is more than a reactive game of eye-ball to eye-ball posturing.

An impulsive, attention deficient and hyper-active President Trump would be better advised to switch from playing poker to chess.

Dr John Nilsson-Wright is a Senior Research Fellow for Northeast Asia, Asia Programme, Chatham House and Senior Lecturer in Japanese Politics and the International Relations of East Asia, University of Cambridge

ColinColin

Mumbai rapper changes up the tune

India's famed music scene is making room for a new generation, bearing turntables and a microphone, instead of a sitar and drums. The Pop Up team meets with one rapper on the rise.

ColinColin

Video

In recent weeks Moscow has been battered by gale force winds and storms that have uprooted trees and filled the Russian capital's river with debris. But the authorities say they're managing to keep the city’s river clean - thanks to Moscow's fleet of Russian-built refuse collection boats. Our correspondent Steve Rosenberg waited for a sunny day…and went on board.

ColinColin

Image copyright AFP Image caption The White House expects a friendly reception in Warsaw

Donald Trump is travelling to the German city of Hamburg to attend a gathering of world leaders. But before he arrives, the US president will stop in Poland, to the delight of its conservative, nationalist government.

Jaroslaw Kaczynski, who leads the ruling Law and Justice party (PiS), has said others in Europe are envious of the visit, mentioning Britain in particular.

Later this month, Mr Trump will also make a presidential visit to France.

So, why Poland first?

1. A warm welcome

US presidents are almost guaranteed a friendly reception in Poland, and this aspect of the trip will appeal to President Trump and make for good pictures at home.

Authorities in Hamburg are expecting up to 100,000 protesters at the G20, and mass demonstrations are also expected in London when he finally makes a long-awaited state visit to the UK.

But in Poland, the White House will be able to breathe easy.

The ruling party will bus in 50 people per parliamentarian, according to the Gazeta Wyborcza newspaper, guaranteeing a friendly crowd of thousands for President Trump's speech in Warsaw's symbolic Krasinski Square on Thursday. The square is home to a monument commemorating the 1944 Warsaw Uprising against the Nazis.

Some argue the bussed-in crowds are unnecessary.

"Unless they do something wrong, pretty much every American president is very popular and will get a warm welcome," says Professor Aleks Szczerbiak, an expert on Polish politics at the University of Sussex.

Image copyright AFP Image caption George W Bush delivered a major foreign policy speech in Warsaw in 2001

2. On the same page

Both Poland's political leaders and Mr Trump see themselves as being at the vanguard of a populist movement against liberal elites who have dominated politics in the West in recent years.

They unashamedly put what they see as the national interest first, be it on climate change or migration, and receive the wrath of many for it.

"Both Kaczynski and Trump perceive themselves as those who can stop this liberal-left political correctness offensive in the world," says Michal Szuldrzynski, a columnist for Rzeczpospolita, an influential centre-right newspaper.

"Paradoxically, the more you criticise Mr Trump and the more you criticise Mr Kaczynski, the more they feel they are right."

Since the PiS came into power in 2015, Poland has taken a confrontational stance within the EU and refused to abide by mandatory refugee resettlement quotas.

Mr Kaczynski once said that migrants travelling to Europe were carrying dangerous diseases.

Reforms made by the government at home have also attracted criticism from human rights groups and led to further conflict with the European Commission, which says the rule of law is at risk.

Image copyright AFP Image caption Polish leaders, including Jaroslaw Kaczynski (centre), have been accused of putting rule of law in jeopardy

However, while there have been calls for Mr Trump to raise issues related to human rights and democracy on his visit, few expect him to do so.

His address at Krasinski Square will "celebrate Poland's emergence as a European power", US National Security Adviser HR McMaster says.

Essentially, analysts say, it's a win-win for both sides - Mr Trump will give Poland the prestige of a visit that will bolster the government against critics that say it has isolated itself, and he will get a warm reception in a major European country run by a government that shares some of his ideology.

3. Spend (on defence) and you shall receive

The visit also allows Mr Trump to demonstrate that those who meet the Nato military spending target of 2% of gross domestic product will be rewarded. He is expected to praise Poland for being one of a handful of Nato members that do so.

About 900 US troops are currently in Poland as part of wider efforts to soothe the anxieties of Nato members in Eastern Europe fearful of Russia.

Image copyright AFP Image caption Mr Trump told Nato allies to spend more on defence at talks in Brussels in May

Indeed Mr Trump's election caused some worry in Poland given expectations at the time that he could strike a grand bargain with Russian President Vladimir Putin - anathema to the Polish right.

Those fears have been somewhat allayed since then but many in the region are hoping he will re-commit while he is in Warsaw to Nato's Article 5 - the principle that an attack on any ally is an attack on them all.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption US troops are welcomed in Zagan by the Polish PM and locals

4. Snub to the EU?

During his Poland trip, Donald Trump will address the Three Seas Summit, a Polish and Croatian initiative bringing together 12 nations between the Baltic, the Adriatic and the Black Sea.

The summit is part of efforts to portray Poland "as a kind of regional leader" outside the Franco-German-dominated EU power structure with which it has clashed, says Prof Szczerbiak.

And by dropping in, Mr Trump will be seen giving his blessing to a project that some EU diplomats eye with suspicion.

"The message is that the US continues to show it's not wedded simply to working with the existing European elites and that it's quite happy" to build ties with governments challenging Brussels on certain issues, Prof Szczerbiak says.

5. It's about the gas

The Polish government is trying to become less energy-dependent on Russia and last month the first ever US liquefied natural gas shipment arrived.

For dealmaker Donald Trump, this is another win-win. Poland and other eastern European countries have a strategic imperative to diversify their energy sources, and the White House wants to sell more US gas overseas.

He will be bringing that message to leaders at the Three Seas Summit.

ColinColin

