Landmark move as first big manufacturer says it will stop making vehicles solely powered by internal combustion engine

All cars sold by Volvo from 2019 onwards will be battery-powered, in what the company called an “historic end” to building models that only have an internal combustion engine.

Between 2019 and 2021, the firm will launch five 100% electric cars, and ensure the rest of its conventional petrol and diesel range offers a hybrid engine of some form.

Håkan Samuelsson, the Volvo chief executive, said: “This announcement marks the end of the solely combustion engine-powered car. Volvo Cars has stated that it plans to have sold a total of 1m electrified cars by 2025. When we said it we meant it. This is how we are going to do it.”

Business Today: sign up for a morning shot of financial news Read more

The carmaker, which is owned by Chinese automotive giant Geely, has yet to build a single fully electric car but already sells five plug-in hybrid models that can run a few dozen miles off a battery before switching to a conventional engine.

More than a quarter of sales of one of those existing models, the crossover SUV XC90, were plug-in hybrid versions last year, much higher than the 5% to 10% the company had anticipated.

But the pricing of that model suggests drivers will pay a premium for future Volvo cars – the basic plug-in hybrid version of the XC90 costs £61,650, £13,250 more than the basic diesel edition.

Several of the major carmakers, including Renault-Nissan, BMW and VW, have announced ambitious plans for electric cars, supported with grants by many governments, which see them as a key way of tackling air pollution and climate change.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Volvo video on its electrification plans

The cars that Volvo produces from 2019 onwards will range from battery-only to plug-in hybrid – which can run for a significant distance before switching to petrol or diesel – and mild hybrids, where a battery helps a conventional engine achieve greater fuel economy.

Ben Lane, the director of Next Green Car, a guide to low-emission cars, said: “It’s not quite the same as saying they will not make any internal combustion engines, but it’s obviously a key moment.

“The key thing is they’re investing in battery technology and they’re looking to get batteries with significant range on board.”

Greenpeace hailed move by Volvo, and said other manufacturers should follow suit.

“Volvo has recognised the huge gains to be made by leading the way in electric. We know electric vehicles are the future, and it’s not a case of if, but when, old style cars powered by climate wrecking fossil fuels will be a thing of the past,” said Paul Morozzo, a campaigner at the group.

Volvo’s owner, Geely, also has interests in electric vehicles through its ownership of a £300m factory in Coventry that will build electric black cabs. The first zero-emission versions of the iconic cab, the TX5, will be delivered later this year, ahead of new Transport for London rules that mean all new black cabs will need to be battery-powered from 1 January 2018.

ColinColin

Labour has accused the government of betraying millions of households after the energy regulator published proposals to extend a price cap for vulnerable customers that fell well short of the Conservatives’ election promises.

Theresa May had pledged a price cap on energy bills for 17m families during the general election campaign, but the policy was missing from the Queen’s speech.



Instead, the business secretary, Greg Clark, wrote to the energy regulator asking it to safeguard “customers on the poorest value tariffs”.

In response, Ofgem said on Monday that it would hold a summit in July to consider what form of “safeguard tariff” would be best, with one option being to extend an existing cap for the 4m households on prepayment meters to a further 2.6m vulnerable households who receive the warm home discount.

Alan Whitehead, the shadow energy minister, asked Clark during an urgent question in the Commons whether he accepted that Ofgem’s response “falls far short” of May’s promise. Whitehead said 17m households “will now feel completely betrayed by this policy U-turn”.

Clark said he was prepared to legislate if the final proposals did not go far enough to address consumers paying over the odds.

John Penrose, a Conservative MP who has led calls for a cap, said the plans were a “stitch-up” by the big six suppliers and urged parliament to legislate.

“Ofgem’s proposals will not end the energy rip-off for 17m families, as we promised in our manifesto. Under this plan, fewer than 3 million customers will be helped and the remaining 14 million will see their energy bills rise as energy companies recoup the cost of the cap by milking the rest of us,” said the former minister in a statement.

The initial plans appear to be a long way from the prime minister’s promise of a cap saving 17m families £100 each, and are confirmation that the government has bowed to industry lobbying. The share price of British Gas’s owner, Centrica, climbed 1.75% after the announcement, and SSE’s rose by nearly 1%.

“What is increasingly clear to us is it that an industry-wide price cap for energy bills is unlikely,” said analysts at Jefferies bank.

No 10 gave a lukewarm response to the Ofgem proposal but stopped short of repeating the pledge to legislate to protect 17m families with a price cap. “Ofgem’s response is a step in the right direction,” May’s official spokesman said. “We’ve said we need a better energy market and are committed to extending price protection currently in place to some vulnerable energy consumers to more people on the poorest-value tariffs.”

He continued: “We are not ruling anything out, whether that is action by the regulator or legislation.”

Ofgem also said it would push forward with reforms recommended by the competition watchdog, including the energy regulator’s own streamlined switching site and forcing firms to tell their customers if another supplier has a cheaper deal.

The regulator is also proceeding with a potentially controversial plan to make comparison sites hide tariffs that they cannot switch customers to immediately and earn commission from. Shoppers will instead have to click a button to show all deals, though sites will have to ensure visitors know they are only receiving a partial view of the market.

New data from the regulator shows that British Gas, EDF, E.ON, Npower and Scottish Power have increased the profit margin they make on billpayers from 3.7% on average in the 2015-16 financial year to 4% in 2016-17.



Ofgem also published figures revealing that, while the costs faced by suppliers in May were up 15% on the same time the year before, they had fallen 6% between February and May. In that same period, five of the six big suppliers increased their prices for customers, some by as much as 10%.

Dermot Nolan, the energy regulator’s chief executive, wrote in a letter to Clark: “Ofgem shares your concern that the market is not working well for all consumers, particularly those who do not regularly switch energy supplier.”

Consumer groups welcomed the prospect of the prepayment cap being widened.

Gillian Guy, the chief executive of Citizens Advice, said: “We have been calling for the prepayment meter cap to be extended to all those eligible for the warm home discount for years and the regulator’s announcement today paves the way for protecting as many as 2.6 million more who can least afford rising energy bills.”

However, Which? said that while more protections and easier switching were good, “people will question whether these interventions are enough to deliver an energy market that finally works for all consumers”.

Price comparison sites, which had strongly lobbied against an absolute price cap, were pleased by the announcement.

Ofgem said it would also help protect vulnerable households by capping the costs for people having a prepayment meter fitted under court orders at £150. Such charges can reach £1,000 under the current regime.

Another planned measure is a simplified switching service for people who have been on the worst-value default tariffs – known as standard variable tariffs (SVTs) – for more than three years. The regulator will automatically provide a customer’s gas and electricity consumption data for them, to make the process easier.

Figures released by Ofgem show that 65% of people are still on an SVT, down fractionally from the 66% when the data was first published last December.

ColinColin

What term do you want to search?

This navigation is new. We'd appreciate your feedback. Share your thoughts here.

ColinColin

FCA reveals details of 2012 report on ‘very serious misconduct’ that eventually resulted in fraud convictions

HBOS took a £240m hit in 2007 after discovering a “serious control breakdown” in its Reading operation, according to information published by the City regulator for the first time.

The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) on Tuesday published information that had been redacted by its predecessor body in a 2012 regulatory notice because of an investigation by Thames Valley police into the HBOS Reading branch.



That police investigation, which began in 2010, led to a trial in January after which six individuals were jailed, including former HBOS employee Lynden Scourfield, who was in charge of looking after troubled businesses and pleaded guilty.

Lloyds and the FCA should go public over HBOS Reading fraud | Nils Pratley Read more

Scourfield referred struggling companies to David Mills and his consultancy QCS. He and Mills were jailed along with four others for their activities between 2003 and 2008.

The redacted paragraphs shine a light on what the Financial Services Authority – the City regulator at the time – had concluded in 2012, while the police investigation was still going on. The passage said: “A serious control breakdown in corporate’s Reading office was discovered in March 2007.

“A senior member of staff had been sanctioning limits and additional facilities beyond the scope of his delegated lending authority undetected for at least three years.

“The additional facilities were provided to distressed companies, and involved the use of a workout firm that had a potentially inappropriate link with the member of staff. This unauthorised extension of credit may have exposed the firm and the firm’s customers to potential fraud.”

The regulator said HBOS took a £76m bad debt provision in the first half of 2007 and by the end of the year this had increased to £240m.

The information is contained in a 2012 decision notice by the FSA – now replaced by the FCA – which as previously reported found an arm of HBOS had committed “very serious misconduct” in the run-up to the crisis.

The so-called decision notice analyses the Reading operations in the context of the systems and controls in place at the time and does not conclude that fraud took place.

After the FCA published the unredacted report, Lloyds Bank, which took over HBOS during the 2008 financial crisis, said “once again we apologise and express our deep regret to customers”.

The bank was “determined to get to the bottom of what happened at HBOS Reading and to find out who knew what, when”.

The publication of the missing six paragraphs comes when the FCA is investigating when HBOS knew about the problems in Reading and while Lloyds is awaiting the outcome of an investigation it has commissioned into how it handled the situation when it took over HBOS.

ColinColin

Consumers who put £1,000 cash in a savings account in 2007 will now have £878 in real terms, say experts

It has been a difficult decade for savers. For 10 years they have suffered falling or ultra-low interest rates, leaving them in the red on their deposit accounts when they might reasonably have expected a modest gain.

The last time the Bank of England put up interest rates was on 5 July 2007. But the financial crash put paid to further rises. In the next 20 months it tumbled to 0.5% and then further in the wake of last year’s Brexit vote to 0.25%.

Ten years ago only £23bn was saved in deposit accounts with no annual interest. The vast majority of savers were earning an average 3.3% on cash in instant access accounts and 5% on accounts where some notice must be given, according to research by the financial adviser Hargreaves Lansdown.

Today almost £180bn of cash savings sits in non-interest-bearing accounts and the few people who shop around earn just 0.4% on money in instant access accounts and 0.9% on notice accounts.

This collapse in interest rates and 26% inflation over the 10-year period has turned £1,000 cash in a savings account in 2007 into £878 in real terms, according to Hargreaves Lansdown.

This compares with the gains made possible by £1,000 invested in the stock market, which is now worth £1,323 adjusted for inflation and with the 50% drop in share prices that followed the financial crash taken into account.

An even better rate of return has gone to those who have borrowed money and have relatively little interest to pay. About 7m households have a mortgage and for them the average interest bill has declined from 5.8% to 2.6%.

Laith Khalaf, the firm’s senior analyst, said: “While cash savers have undoubtedly felt the pinch from lower interest rates, there have been benefits for borrowers which have helped support the economy.”

He said unsecured consumer borrowing rates have fallen too. The result was much lower levels of consumer loan defaults.

“UK lenders have written off £2.5bn of bad consumer loans over the last year. This compares to £6.8bn in 2007,” he said.

One consequence of cheap borrowing is that Britons are doing more of it than ever. In absolute terms, UK consumer debt stands at £199bn, compared with £191bn in July 2007.

“The good news is household income has also risen over this period, which along with low interest rates make this debt more affordable,” he said.

However, the household debt to disposable income ratio, which peaked at 159.7% in 2008, has started to rise again, up from 139.9% in 2015 to 142.6% in 2016.

ColinColin

Cut-price rail fares can now be bought as close as 10 minutes before departure rather than the day before

Seven rail companies, including Virgin Trains’ east and west coast franchises, have agreed to allow passengers to buy cheaper Advance tickets as close as 10 minutes before their journey starts.

Following the lead taken by CrossCountry in January 2015 after a successful trial, seven more train companies have dropped punitive restrictions that in the past meant that customers could generally only buy cut-price Advance tickets up to midnight on the day before travel.

The Rail Delivery Group (RDG), which represents the train operators and Network Rail, said customers of Grand Central, Greater Anglia, Northern, TransPennine Express, Virgin Trains East Coast, Virgin Trains West Coast and those using the Caledonian Sleeper from London to Scotland can now also buy Advance tickets for many trains on the day of travel.

Advance tickets – cut-price fares for a limited number of seats on specific trains – can be bought as little as 10 minutes before the train departs, helping people who have to make urgent train journeys for business or family reasons.

The increased flexibility is the latest action to emerge following the fares and ticketing action plan set up last year by government, industry and passenger groups to try to simplify the UK’s labyrinthine and confusing rail ticketing system. Operators have been criticised for confusing offers and strict adherence to terms and conditions.

“Not everyone can plan journeys in advance and now more people can buy cheaper tickets on the day, even on their way to the station,” said Jacqueline Starr, managing director of customer experience at the RDG. “We want customers to get the best possible deal whenever they travel.”

Research by passenger group Transport Focus found that Advance tickets are popular with rail passengers, as they can offer significant savings of up to 70% for those prepared to commit to a particular train. But the vast array of different types of tickets, different names and baffling restrictions are confusing, it warned. Despite the restrictions, sales of popular Advance tickets have increased by almost four-fold over the last ten years.

“Passengers will welcome this change as it will provide them with a greater opportunity to have access to cheaper tickets” said Anthony Smith, Transport Focus chief executive. “No doubt many passengers travelling with these eight train companies will take advantage of this offer. We look forward to the other train companies introducing this opportunity soon.”











ColinColin

Demand for fresh fruit and veg and a dash for paddling pools, summer clothes and fans helped Sainsbury’s deliver its strongest sales growth in more than four years.



Sales at stores open more than a year, excluding fuel, rose by 2.3% in the 16 weeks to 1 July, up from 0.3% in the previous three months partly thanks to the warm start to the summer. It was the strongest pace of growth since March 2013.

Mike Coupe, the Sainsbury’s group chief executive, said: “We have delivered a strong performance, driven by our differentiated strategy, offering customers quality, value and choice across food, general merchandise, clothing and financial services.”

The group, which also owns Argos, was partly helped by the timing of Easter and Mother’s Day, which it said had contributed about 0.3 percentage points of the growth. Excluding that factor, the pace was still slightly ahead of City expectations of 1.9% growth.

Coupe said shoppers were snapping up Sainsbury’s own-label products after it had implemented hundreds of quality improvements and held prices on basics including milk, chicken breast and eggs.

He said inflation, which is now running at more than 2.5% according to the CPI index, had started to hit towards the end of the period but Sainsbury’s had “managed to keep a control over prices and the impact on customers”.



Fresh produce performed particularly well, outperforming the market with volume growth of 1% as Sainsbury’s cut the price of summer favourites including Jersey Royal potatoes and British strawberries. That helped boost total grocery sales by 3% compared to 0.3% growth in the previous three months.



Coupe played down the impact of the weather. He said that the number of warm days over the whole period was “not far off the same” as last year. He pointed to Sainsbury’s improvement in price position relative to its competitors for the group’s step up in performance. Coupe also said there were signs that shoppers were choosing to eat at home rather than go out for meals as disposable income came under pressure from rising inflation.

But he said: “We are not seeing a massive change in consumer behaviour.”



Online grocery sales rose by 8%, Sainsbury’s convenience store sales were up by 10% and clothing sales rose by 7.2%.

All the supermarkets have been lifted by a combination of a warm start to the summer and rising inflation.

Sainsbury’s said the number of transactions carried out in its stores rose by 2%.

Coupe said that Sainsbury’s general merchandise and clothing ranges, including Argos, outperformed the market, as its fast track delivery and collect-from-store services recorded a “stellar performance” during the quarter, particularly during the warm weather when customers wanted items such as paddling pools and electric fans on the day.

Total sales rose 1% despite the closure of dozens of Argos and Habitat outlets in Homebase stores after the takeover of the DIY chain buy Australian firm Bunnings.



Sainsbury’s said it had opened 10 convenience stores in the period but made no mention of Nisa, the wholesale buying group with which it is understood to be in exclusive talks.

Coupe said: “Lots of conversations are had and there is lots of speculation but lots of things don’t come off.”



The supermarket is thought to be considering a £130m takeover of Nisa, which supplies and provides marketing support to thousands of small independent stores.

Nisa’s 1,400 members, which include the McColl’s convenience store chain, operate 2,500 shops. They would have to approve any takeover and many are fiercely protective of their independence.

Laith Khalaf, a senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said the bigger picture remained challenging for UK supermarkets: “Weaker sterling is pushing up food prices and putting a dent in consumers’ purses, while the trading environment remains as competitive as ever.

“Indeed the turf war the big supermarkets have been fighting against the discounters may start to look like a schoolyard skirmish if Amazon decides it wants a piece of the UK grocery market.”

David Alexander, the lead analyst at GlobalData, said: “With Sainsbury’s receiving a significant helping hand from the upturn in fortunes for the wider grocery sector, it is too soon to judge whether this quarter represents a more positive new chapter for the grocer. That said, the change in tone is promising.”

ColinColin

Worldpay, the UK’s largest electronic payment processing group, is the subject of a takeover tussle less than two years after floating on the stock market.

Shares in the group closed up nearly 28% on Tuesday, making it the biggest riser on the FTSE 100, after it revealed separate approaches from US payment handler Vantiv, and JPMorgan Chase bank. At this level, the group is valued at more than £8bn.



The takeover battle for Worldpay underlines the boom in the electronic payments industry, as more people shift from cash to paying online and in store card transactions switch from chip and pin to contactless.

Figures from the British Retail Consortium show that cash was used for less than half of all UK retail transactions for the first time in 2015. The rise of contactless card payments accelerated the trend away from cash, according to the BRC, proving a popular payment method for lower value transactions that used to be the mainstay for cash.

The number of non-cash transactions globally rose by about 10% to 426bn in 2015 according to the latest estimates from Capgemini world payments report.

Under takeover rules Vantiv and JPMorgan have a deadline of 5pm on 1 August to make a firm offer or walk away. “There can be no certainty either that an offer will be made nor as to the terms of any offer, if made. A further announcement will be made if appropriate,” Worldpay said in a statement.



Launched in 1989, Worldpay provides the technology that allows retailers and other business to accept card payments and online or mobile transactions. Worldpay, chaired by City veteran Sir Michael Rake, processed 15bn transactions in 2016, with revenue rising 15% to £4.5bn and pre-tax profits leaping to £264m from £19m in 2015.

Previous owner Royal Bank of Scotland sold the business in 2010 under the terms of the bank’s 2008 British taxpayer bailout, with private equity firms Bain Capital and Advent International taking control.

Since then Worldpay has expanded rapidly, with the number of employees rising from about 2,000 to more than 5,000. The business is based in London but also has major offices in Manchester, Cambridge and Gateshead.

The takeover approaches show how payment processors have become attractive targets for banks, technology firms, and credit card companies at a time of rapid growth for the sector. Over the weekend, Danish payments services company Nets said it had been approached by potential suitors.

Analysts said news that Worldpay was being circled by potential bidders could trigger interest from others. “We believe Worldpay is a unique asset and the current interest from two US peers could also trigger the intention of parties like Google, Amazon, Apple,” said analysts at Mediobanca Securities.

Angelo Meda, head of equities at Banor Capital, said more consolidation in the sector was likely. “This is one of the most intriguing sub-sectors in the financials space. There are a lot of companies still, and we are probably going to have only one or two big leaders in the payments space.”

Worldpay group floated in 2015, with Rake as chairman and Philip Jansen as chief executive. Rake’s other roles include chairman of BT, and he was previously deputy chairman of Barclays and president of the CBI business lobby group.

During his time at Barclays, Rake was instrumental in ousting chief executive Antony Jenkins in July 2015, following a boardroom row over the future of Barclays’ investment banking business.

“Having only joined the FTSE 100 in 2015, [Worldpay] was a welcome addition to an index that had become overpopulated by banks and miners,” said Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at spread betting firm IG. “Its departure would mark a step backward for the UK’s top-line index.”



ColinColin

Luxury flats with a price tag of up to £50m were touted as an easy sell – yet have failed to shift as the London market slows

When it opened the developers of the Shard boasted that it should only take “about 20 phone calls” to sell the 10 exclusive apartments near the top of the tower for up to £50m each.

Yet five years on from the Duke of York and the former prime minister of Qatar officially opening “Europe’s first vertical city” with a dazzling laser display on 5 July 2012, all 10 of the flats on the 53rd to 65th floors of the 72-storey building appear to remain unsold.

Brochures for the apartments, which include three two-storey duplex units, boasted that on a clear day residents should be able to see the sea and the grandstands at Ascot from their new perch in the centre of the capital.

London’s empty towers mark a very British form of corruption | Simon Jenkins Read more

The penthouse stands at 735ft, just below the entrance to the £30.95-a-time public viewing deck, which attracts up to 6,000 visitors a day. Even the lowest apartment, which it was hoped would sell for £30m, is higher than any home ever built in London.

But the brochures are no longer available and the tower’s developers and its Qatari owners are reluctant to speak about the residences, which they had boasted would be among the most luxurious in London. As well as the views and double-height entertaining space, potential residents were said to have the luxury of being able to order room service from the five-star Shangri-La hotel below, and call on its maids to turn down their beds. A “back stairs” service lift was shown in floorplans so meals and cleaners could be delivered directly to the apartments’ kitchens.

Baron Phillips, spokesman for Irvine Sellar, the recently deceased property visionary who led the development of the Shard, declined to comment about the unsold apartments. It was Phillips who told the media that several of the world’s super-rich had expressed interest in buying apartments years before the building was finished and said of selling them: “I should think about 20 phone calls should do it, don’t you?”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest The view from the 67th floor of the Shard. Photograph: Victoria Jones/PA

Sellar convinced Italian architect Renzo Piano to design the Shard over lunch in Berlin in 2000, with the first designs sketched on a menu. But the project nearly collapsed in the wake of the 2007-08 financial crisis before Qatar stepped in to buy 80% of the tower.

Representatives of Qatar Diar, the real estate arm of the gulf state’s sovereign wealth fund, did not respond to requests for comment. A spokeswoman for Real Estate Management, the property management firm appointed to oversee the day-to-day management of the Shard, said the apartments were still “completely empty shells”.

No apartment sales have been recorded by the Land Registry. Levels 53 to 65 and the apartments’ exclusive entrance on the ground floor were in December 2015 leased to LBQ Four, a Jersey-registered firm believed to be part of the London Bridge Quarter, the holding company that owns the Shard. The 250-year lease valued the 10 apartments at a total of £199,250,000.

Henry Pryor, a luxury property buying agent, said he was not surprised that the Shard’s owners had yet to sell any of the apartments as a sale of one apartment would set a publicly recorded price and make it harder to sell the other apartments for more if and when the London ultra-prime property market improves.

“If they could sell them for what they want for them they would have sold by now,” he said. “If they sell they will crystallise a price and that makes it very difficult for future sales because the benchmark has been set. That is one reason developers chuck in goodies [like cars or fine wine] to keep the apparent price up.”

Pryor said the Shard apartments have not been able to attract prices near the record £136m paid for a flat in the Candy brothers’ One Hyde Park for reasons that any avid watcher of TV property shows would know: “Location, location, location.”

“Kirstie and Phil tell us it every week, location, location, location. Rich people don’t want to shell out zillions living south of the river, it’s a shock enough living anywhere south of the [Hyde] park,” he said. “Nobody knows anyone who lives south of the river.”

The Shard has done better at letting the lower floors for offices, although many have gone to companies owned or partially owned by Qatar. But some whole floors are still to be let, including all 29,824 sq ft of the 12th floor.

The University of Warwick’s business school has rented level 17 and fitted it out with a lecture theatre with perhaps the best student view in the world.



ColinColin

Demand cools after strong first half in latest sign consumers are becoming reluctant to commit to major spending decisions

New car sales in the UK went into reverse for a third month in June in the latest sign that consumers are becoming increasingly reluctant to commit to major spending decisions.

Sales fell by 4.8% year on year last month to 243,454, following an 8.5% drop in May and a 19.8% slide in April, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT). In the first half of the year overall, new car sales fell by 1.3% to 1.4m vehicles, which was still the second biggest first half on record.

In the second quarter overall, new car sales fell by 10.3%, the biggest quarterly drop in more than six years.

All Volvo cars to be electric or hybrid from 2019 Read more

The slowdown in recent months follows five years of growth in new car sales, which has helped to underpin consumer-led growth in the wider economy. Unions have warned that UK households face a fresh crisis in living standards as inflation rises faster than wages, leaving consumers with less money to spend.

“Demand for new cars has started to cool following five consecutive years of solid growth but the numbers are still strong and the first half of the year is the second biggest on record,” said Mike Hawes, the SMMT chief executive. “Provided consumer and business confidence holds, we expect demand to remain at a similarly high level over the coming months.”



The strong first-half performance was skewed by March, the biggest month for new car sales since the trade body started collecting data in 1976. Analysts said it was a bumper month because consumers brought forward car purchases to avoid a rise in vehicle excise duty on 1 April.

An explosion in cheap car finance deals has fuelled growth in consumer credit to such an extent that the sector has attracted scrutiny from the Bank of England and the Financial Conduct Authority.



The Bank’s governor, Mark Carney, warned last week that the rapid increase in consumer credit was among “pockets of risk” in the financial system. While broader consumer credit is growing at a rate of about 10% a year, car finance is growing by 15%.

Tamzen Isacsson, a director at the SMMT, said finance deals were an affordable and flexible way for motorists to buy a range of cars.

She added: “The motor finance market is highly competitive and governed by strict rules but given the recent growth in the popularity of motor finance it is understandable that regulators want to know how the market is operating in more depth. We look forward to engaging in this process.”



Smaller cars, typically powered by smaller petrol engines, were most popular among buyers in June, with superminis and small family cars accounting for almost 60% of the market.

Diesel car sales fell by 14.7%, while petrol car sales rose by 2.5% and sales of alternative fuel vehicles jumped 29% to 10,721. Demand dropped among all types of customers, including private buyers, business and fleet.

“It’s encouraging to see alternatively fuelled vehicles experiencing rapid growth but adoption is still at a relatively low level and more long term incentives are required if this new generation of vehicles is to be a more common sight on British roads,” Hawes said.

Bestselling cars in June 2017

ColinColin

