What term do you want to search?

This navigation is new. We'd appreciate your feedback. Share your thoughts here.

ColinColin

Lawyer for former Iraqi general argues that PM during 2003 invasion should face trial due to legal precedent set during Nuremburg hearings

The Chilcot inquiry’s conclusion that the invasion of Iraq was unnecessary and undermined the United Nations requires the prosecution of Tony Blair, the high court has heard.

In his opening argument calling for a war crimes trial in Britain, Michael Mansfield QC said that the offence of waging an aggressive war has effectively been assimilated into English law.

The attempt to bring Blair – with the former foreign secretary Jack Straw, and former attorney general Lord Goldsmith – to court has been launched by the former Iraqi general Abdulwaheed Al Rabbat.

Rabbat, said Mansfield, was motivated by last year’s publication of the report of the Chilcot inquiry into the 2003 Iraq war.

Mansfield summarised the report’s findings as: “Saddam Hussein did not pose an urgent threat to the UK, intelligence reporting about [Iraqi] weapons of mass destruction was presented with unwarranted certainty, that the war was unnecessary and that the UK undermined the authority of the UN security council.

“Nothing could be more emphatic than these findings,” he said. “It was an unlawful war.”

Mansfield argued that when British prosecutors had opened their cases at the Nuremburg war crimes trials at the end of the second world war, they had acted as though the crime of aggression had already been assimilated into English law.

An initial application to launch the prosecution was dismissed at Westminster magistrates court on the grounds that Blair enjoys immunity and that the crime of aggression does not exist in English law.

The high court appeal is being heard by the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd, and Mr Justice Ouseley.

The current attorney general, Jeremy Wright QC, has intervened in the case to argue that the crime does not exist in the statute book. “The crime of aggression is not known to English law,” James Eadie QC, for the attorney general, told the court.

A number of Iraqi supporters of Rabbat sat at the back of the court. Speaking before the hearing started, Sabah Al-Mukhtar of the Arab Lawyers Network, said: “This is just looking at whether the first court was right in refusing to entertain the case.

“The magistrates’ court dismissed it on the grounds that Tony Blair had immunity and that the crime of aggression was not part of English law. Many think they were not correct on that.”

The hearing continues.



ColinColin

Andy Slaughter, Catherine West and Ruth Cadbury voted for amendment calling for UK to stay in EU single market

Jeremy Corbyn has sacked three Labour frontbenchers who voted against the party in favour of a Queen’s speech amendment calling for Britain to remain within the customs union and single market.

Queen's speech passes as 50 Labour MPs defy Corbyn and back staying in single market - Politics live Read more

The Labour leader, who has been emboldened by the general election result, decided to take a tougher approach than after the vote to trigger article 50, when shadow ministers who rebelled were allowed to remain in position.



Shadow housing ministers Andy Slaughter and Ruth Cadbury and shadow Foreign Office minister Catherine West joined dozens of Labour backbenchers, the SNP, Liberal Democrats, Greens and Plaid Cymru in backing the amendment.



A fourth frontbencher, Daniel Zeichner, the MP for pro-remain Cambridge, stepped down as shadow transport minister before the vote, arguing that he had to back the position on principle.

Daniel Zeichner (@DanielZeichner) I'm a passionate pro-European & straight-forward politician so I've taken hard decision to resign as shadow minister to back Single Market.

The amendment attracted the support of 101 MPs across different parties, including 49 Labour politicians who defied the leadership. It called for the government not to leave the EU without a deal, to guarantee a parliamentary vote on the final outcome of negotiations, to set in place transitional arrangements, and to “set out proposals to remain within the customs union and single market”.

Other demands included more respect for the devolved administrations and clear protections for EU nationals already living in the UK.

Corbyn ordered his MPs to abstain on the wording because, although Labour policy chimes with most of the sentiment, the party does not support the bid to keep full membership of the single market.

Chuka Umunna, one of the Labour MPs who led the motion alongside Stephen Doughty and Kate Green, tweeted:

Chuka Umunna (@ChukaUmunna) As I said to constituents during the election,I'll keep fighting to keep us in the Single Market and Customs Union -the best deal for the UK

Theresa May passed her Queen’s speech with the support of the DUP, securing a majority of 14 as 323 backed her legislative package and 309 opposed it.

Labour’s frontbench amendment to end the public sector pay cap, introduce a higher minimum wage and increase taxes on the wealthy was defeated by 323 votes to 297.

“The Conservatives survived by the skin of their teeth today, supported by the DUP, but this is a government in chaos,” said Corbyn, claiming May’s party was “all over the place” on Brexit, and was saying one thing while doing another on public sector pay.

“This government is out of control, with no mandate for continued cuts to our schools, hospitals, police and other vital public services or for a race-to-the-bottom Brexit. Labour will oppose these policies every step of the way,” the Labour leader added.

“Labour offers a clear alternative, laid out in our manifesto, which would put wealth, power and opportunity back in the hands of the many, not the few.”

As sources confirmed that MPs were being dismissed from frontbench positions, one Labour politician said: “It is disappointing, when the frontbench have been reaching out to try to attract new members over recent days, that members who had quite clearly stated positions on the single market and customs union, and were elected on that basis, should be punished for sticking by their principles.”

He argued that there were “a range of views in the party on the approach to Brexit, which is not surprising given the views in the country, and we need to be working together to find common ground”.

Cadbury, in a statement issued after Corbyn’s move, said: “During the recent election campaign I made an explicit commitment to the voters in Brentford and Isleworth that I would do all in my power to secure a Brexit settlement that secured jobs, rights and environmental protections.

“I received strong support for my position from my constituents, particularly young people voting for the first time and many others who voted Labour for the first time. It was a key reason my vote increased by over 10,000.

“Therefore I had no doubt that I had to support the amendment moved by Labour colleagues with cross-party support today. The amendment ruled out withdrawing from the EU without a deal, sought a parliamentary vote on the final negotiations and proposed to remaining in the customs union and single market.”

She added: “This is a point of principle for me and I felt bound to honour the commitment I had made to voters. I was aware that, as I was breaking the whip, I could not retain my frontbench role.”

Some Labour MPs campaigned on a soft Brexit position, but the shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, has argued that the important factor is that Britain enjoys the benefits of the single market, even if membership is not possible.



The leadership has been frustrated by backbenchers organising in favour of single-market membership, with 50 Labour MPs, MEPs and peers joining together to launch a group opposing hard Brexit. They signed a statement claiming that young voters backed their party in 2017 because they wanted it to “stop the Tories in their tracks” over Brexit.

The group, made up of politicians on the left and right of the party, claimed the best way to do that was by “fighting unambiguously for membership of the single market”.

Tim Farron, the outgoing Liberal Democrat leader, said people would regret backing Labour in the hope that the party would change the direction on Brexit.

“Millions of people who voted for Jeremy Corbyn were hoping for a new approach to Brexit. They will be feeling utterly betrayed tonight that he has yet again failed to oppose this government’s extreme Brexit agenda,” he said. “On the most important issue of the day, Jeremy Corbyn ordered his MPs to sit on their hands.”

James Cleverly, the Conservative MP, said: “When it comes to Brexit, Labour are in total chaos. There is deep division at the heart of the Labour party on the most crucial issue facing the country today – they still can’t agree on the fundamentals and would get the worst Brexit deal at the highest price.”

ColinColin

Jeremy Corbyn clearly believes it is better that we leave, but readers are divided on whether dissenting Labour MPs should challenge this position

Jeremy Corbyn’s refusal to support the amendment calling for Britain to remain within the EU customs union and single market confirms that he believes the country would be better off outside (Corbyn sacks three frontbench MPs over single market, 30 June). This is not, as has been presented, about him fulfilling the wishes of those who voted to leave the EU in the referendum. He has no way of telling what the majority of voters wanted on this particular issue. It is therefore his personal view.

If only 5% of those who voted in the referendum voted to leave the EU (as defined on the ballot slip) and yet wanted to stay within the customs union and single market, ie the Norwegian model, then there would be a majority support in the country in favour of staying in the single market. Since we, and Corbyn, have no way of knowing what level of support there was for the Norwegian model, the Labour party line on the issue is based on political judgment. Corbyn clearly believes it is better that we leave. It is time for him to be honest, in line with his new style of politics, and say so – and explain why.

Shaun V Soper

Midhurst, West Sussex

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Former shadow cabinet member Ruth Cadbury. Photograph: Richard Gardner/Rex/ Shutterstock

• Ruth Cadbury is to be applauded for her rebellion over the single market, but not for her justification of it. It is not the job of MPs to vote in accordance with their constituents’ wishes. They should listen to as many voices as possible and then vote for what, in their judgment, is in the best interests of their constituents. This is representative democracy, for which MPs are held to account at the ballot box.

Geoff Reid

Bradford

• Despite having been a supporter for more than 40 years, I voted Labour on 8 June neither because of its leader nor, contrary to what Emily Thornberry suggests (Labour urged to focus on toppling Tories rather than the ‘faux battles’ over Brexit, 1 July), because of its manifesto. I did so because I saw this election as being overwhelmingly about Brexit, and thus essentially about the parliament we will have until the end of the negotiations. Given their significance for the UK’s future, these will almost certainly require another election by 2020, no matter what their outcome.

As a strong resister, I was looking to the general election to deliver as many MPs as possible who would see it as their key role in this parliament to represent the will of the 48% who voted remain, and who would remember that their mandate would come not from their party or its leader, let alone from the 2016 referendum, but from those who voted for them on 8 June.

For those reasons, I strongly commend the Labour MPs who voted for the Umunna/Doughty amendment, and regard Thornberry’s calling this “virtue signalling” as high-handed and patronising. When it comes to Brexit-related matters, I would urge MPs who want to represent the 48% to follow the lead of Ken Clarke rather than Jeremy Corbyn.

Richard de Friend

London

• “Faux battles”, as Emily Thornberry says, are indeed the last thing Labour needs, and one has to question, yet again, Chuka Umunna’s motives. Why can’t he, like the rest of us, enjoy the fact that the Tories are in a huge mess, lacking direction and leadership, and under fire for the massive damage their failed austerity policies have caused?

The “botched response” by the government has not been confined to the Grenfell Tower tragedy: its opening Brexit salvos have been ridiculed in Brussels, and its confusion over the public sector wage freeze is simply adding to Conservative anguish. Labour tactics until the summer recess should focus on displaying a united front, and capitalising on the government’s disunited one.

Plenty of opportunities for political gain will come, especially if Labour concentrates on the manifesto’s “there is an alternative to this” message, publicises the need for fairness to be introduced into the government’s proposal to continue to subsidise wealthy landowners, and waits for the inevitable car crashes whenever Tory politicians are asked challenging questions in interviews.

Bernie Evans

Liverpool

• Elisabeth Young (Letters, 1 July) gives heavily ironic thanks to Jeremy Corbyn for his stance on Brexit. May I, in the same vein, thank Chuka Umunna and his pals who tabled and voted for an amendment that directly contradicted the leadership’s directions, thus once again making the party seem chaotically divided and hence unfit to govern. Moreover, it clearly helped those in the press who like to present the party as bent on thwarting “the will of the people”. And, of course, it stood no chance of success, so it can only have been posturing.

Having done my best to support Labour since Corbyn stood for election, I can now resume my former position as “disappointed ex-Labour voter” and have more time to myself. Thanks!

John Goodier

Newport, Shropshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters

ColinColin

American journalist Stryker McGuire wrote the magazine article that initiated the 'Cool Britannia' phenomenon in 1996. Back then, the City was the engine of our prosperity, British music, nightlife, art and fashion were the best in the world, and a young, dynamic Tony Blair was about to topple the Tories. Now McGuire contrasts those heady times with the Britain he sees today, broke and bereft of hope and spirit. Ahead of Barack Obama's visit for the G20 summit, he asks: what went wrong ... and where do we go from here?

A few days before Barack Obama's inauguration I was sitting in a BBC studio in west London, a tiny microphone clipped to my lapel, and waiting to go on-air. On one of the TV monitors there were scenes of exultation as Americans flocked to a pre-inaugural event that formed part of the Passion play surrounding the ascension of the 44th President of the United States of America. One of the BBC presenters leaned over to me and said: "We just don't do hope here, do we?"

I thought about that afterwards. Actually, we did do hope here, and it wasn't that long ago.

True, it feels now like another era. The time was 1997. John Major was on the way out, along with 18 years of Conservative rule. Tony Blair was on the way in. It was the age, as hundreds of headlines proclaimed, of "Cool Britannia". We look back - after Iraq, after all the disappointments - and what we mostly remember, cynically, is this bright, shiny, smiling young man crossing the threshold at 10 Downing Street amid a throng of Labour faithful and party-issue flags.

But the moment was, to be fair, much richer than that. Blair didn't just represent the end of Tory dominance; he represented the beginning of something, too. The electorate, especially perhaps those middle Englanders who voted Labour for the first time, saw him as their skywalker, the man who would lead post-imperial Britain, post-Thatcher Britain, into the uncharted 21st century. It was, all in all, a good time.

How different everything is today. Optimism is a thing of the past ("We just don't do hope here, do we?"). Blair, in the popular imagination at least, is an ex-statesman out making speeches and cashing in on his Downing Street years; Gordon Brown is a well-meaning technocrat incapable of steering Britain through these depressed and complicated times; and Brown's likely replacement, David Cameron, is a nice guy, and getting nicer, but a guy who, again in the public perception at least, lacks the grit, savvy and blockbuster ideas to navigate us through this perilous economic barrier reef.

Having been there at the creation of the "Cool Britannia" phenomenon, I must in all good conscience preside over its demise. In a few days, as the leaders of the world's 19 largest economies and the president of the European Union gather for the G20 Summit, London will once again, and if only for a few hours, be in the spotlight. The London they and the world see will be, if not unrecognisable from the London of the mid-1990s, then a very different place from the London of those days when hope and optimism reigned.

I first came to this country as a visitor in the early 1980s. The London I saw was the maligned metropolis of tiresome clichés: a drab place with great history, poor heating and worse food. By the time I returned to live and work here in 1996, London had been transformed. And I did a story about it. In the breathless language of an American news magazine, London was not only cool but "the coolest city on the planet". "London Rules," said the Newsweek cover, which featured a sleek female model wearing a striking Philip Treacy hat in the shape of the union flag. I never used the words "Cool Britannia" but, as you can imagine, my story nonetheless launched a thousand "Cool Britannia" ships.

This was no mere confection on my part. London was in fact stunning to behold. If loss of empire was once a drag on the spirit of the British people, the immigration that resulted in part from that loss had by the mid-1990s become a major driving force behind the richly multicultural London blossoming before our eyes. It was a heady time, and even Thatcherism could be seen in an appealing light: as detested as it was by so many, Thatcherism had worked a kind of alchemy on British society, effecting a multitude of changes, from the economy to the arts, some of which were not intended by the Iron Lady herself.

Thatcher's Big Bang revolutionised the City. A new generation of masters of the universe (the ones we used to envy and now loathe) replaced the less inventive and less aggressive pinstriped stockbrokers and bankers of old. London was the centre of this revolution in British life. We now scorn the world of finance. But the City was perhaps the single greatest driver behind the prosperity and laissez-faire gumption that cascaded across the country.

During my early years here the number of foreign banks in London grew from 73 in the mid-1980s to 479, including 10 American banks that alone employed 21,000 people. Think back to the sheer energy that crackled through the Square Mile, part of a financial and related business-services industry that makes up roughly a quarter of the British economy. In a show of confidence, even defiance, property developers planned massive buildings in and around sites in the City that had been bombed by the IRA just four years earlier.

As London prospered it drew closer and closer to New York. Money, people and ideas flowed back and forth between the two great world cities. Wall Street salaries, bonuses and even dress codes began to shape City life: in some instances London law firms had to double what they paid newly qualified lawyers because of pressure from the New York competition; City boys began wearing chinos and shirts open at the neck. It was not uncommon for those who could afford it to own homes in both cities. Then, as now, more money was churning through London and New York than through all the rest of the world's financial centres combined. Out of all this grew NY-LON, a single city separated by an ocean.

The phenomenal changes reshaping London didn't stop at the world of finance. By the mid-1990s London had become a hotspot for art and design. Some London art dealers and collectors, such as Jay Jopling and Charles Saatchi, were more famous than their artists - and some artists were more famous than their art. For years the London architect Richard Rogers was known mainly for having designed the Pompidou Centre in Paris in the 1970s; now, finally, he had more work than he could handle in his home town, including the proposed new Terminal 5 at Heathrow. The week before my story came out, plans were announced for a glorious Ferris wheel on the Thames - what would become the London Eye, one of the UK's most popular paid-entry tourist attractions.

In the fashion world, Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design was the place to learn the trade. The Paris fashion houses Givenchy and Dior installed two of its graduates, John Galliano and Alexander McQueen, as their top couturiers. Ralph Lauren, Calvin Klein, Donna Karan and Tommy Hilfiger were all putting stores in Bond Street.

Eurostar had brought the continent right into the heart of London. Arriving in droves, young advertising creative types were coming to London to hone their skills and soak up its by then famous nightlife. Clubs such as the Ministry of Sound, then edgy and fresh, were pulling in young people from Europe and beyond. Immigrants from around the world pumped new skills, innovation, enthusiasm and just plain hard work into a labour-hungry, creatively starved economy.

My "London Rules" story was a media sensation. One day not long after it hit the newsstands I got a call from the research department at Conservative Central Office, asking for copies. Within days there stood John Major at the Lord Mayor of London's banquet, embracing "Cool Britannia" and boasting that "our theatres give the lead to Broadway, our pop culture rules the airwaves, our country has taken over the fashion catwalks of Paris".

Not that it did Major much good. It was Tony Blair who benefited from the changes that were sweeping through London and Britain a dozen years ago. For a while at least, somewhat like Obama today in America, Blair was for many Britons that breath of political fresh air that comes along once in a great while and defines an era. Though his life story and political career are no match for the drama and historical significance of America's first black president, the man who marched up Downing Street with his family on 2 May 1997 inspired hope and optimism in a nation yearning to push off from the past and sail around the coming millennium into a new century.

Like the country that was coming into its own in those years, Blair was unstuffy, unembarrassed by wealth, newly confident. He was also relatively young - just 43 when he took office. His wife not only worked; she earned much more than he did. There would be children again at 10 Downing Street. The language of class warfare would fade, replaced by talk of "community", which sounded good even if not everybody could figure out what it meant. New Labour, New Britain, as the Labour party slogan said. Onward and upward.

The Blair era is long gone, and so too is the national spirit, the hope and the optimism, that reigned in those days. Gordon Brown, though he seems invigorated by economic catastrophe, suffers from the grey, been-there-too-long aura that wreathed Major in the aftermath of Thatcher. As if that weren't bad enough, Brown suffers by comparison to Obama. Obama - with a Baedeker background that took him from Jakarta to Honolulu, to Africa in search of his roots and self, with his unmistakable self-assurance, with his curiosity and intellect, not to mention his inability to live without his BlackBerry - is very 21st century. However unfairly, Brown, who turned 58 in February and is not that much older than the 47-year-old president, seems trapped in the 20th.

Psychologically and physically, Brown resembles the new presidential limo built for Obama: fitted with military-grade armour eight inches thick, wheels equipped with run-flat tires, and bullet-proof windows with glass so thick they block out much natural light. He does himself no favours by seeking to ingratiate himself with the American leader - an exercise in what the historian Timothy Garton Ash calls "the Jeeves school of diplomacy" that will surely be on display at the London Summit on Thursday.

Although the US and the UK are both racked by economic chaos, America feels like a country on the move and Britain a country at a standstill. The thriving, dynamic Britain of the 1990s has not quite turned into the "Iceland-on-Thames" of the Observer columnist Will Hutton's fears, and London is not Reykjavik. But as we sink deeper into recession and the number of unemployed multiplies around us, what many of us saw as strengths a decade ago now loom as weaknesses.

At times of economic stress, immigration typically falls into disfavour and becomes a hot-button issue; so it is no surprise that the government has decided to impose a £50 "migrant tax" on would-be workers and students coming into the UK from outside of the EU. Glitzy restaurants and cutting-edge fashion that used to be signs of welcome creativity reek of excess in a time of belt-tightening. Heavily mortgaged homes that looked like brilliant retirement nest eggs when property prices were soaring year after year now just look like basket cases. Construction sites and street works that once raised expectations of things to come now seem like major inconveniences. Damien Hirst's diamond-encrusted skull from two years ago now looks like the perfect artefact to draw the line between the excess of the recent past and the frightful times coming our way.

As for the City of London, the cut and thrust of entrepreneurship that looked smart just a few years ago now looks reckless. The great engine room of British prosperity now feels like an anchor - a drag on Britain's recovery and one among several explanations behind the International Monetary Fund's assessment that the UK's economic slump will be worse than that of any other advanced economy. This past week, Britain slipped into deflation - a decline in general price levels - for the first time in 50 years.

Meanwhile unemployment has passed the 2 million mark, possibly headed for a devastating 3 million. With gloom spreading, bankers are fearful of revealing their occupation in pubs, politicians are under fire for padding their expense accounts, the gigantic new Westfield London mall on the edge of Shepherd's Bush Green - one of the largest shopping centres in Europe - is eerily quiet, and neither VAT tax cuts nor stimulus programmes can coax consumers into spending more.

In this climate an undercurrent of defeatism threatens to revive what Blair once called "post-Empire malaise". He used the phrase more than 10 years ago, at a time when he felt Britain was emerging from that syndrome, but the disease's symptoms are appearing now - a lack of confidence, an unsettled sense of identity. Blair saw Britain's so-called special relationship with America as a way forward. Britain, he reckoned, could use US economic ties to strengthen the British economy and maintain London's status as a world-class financial centre. By joining forces with Washington on the global stage, Britain could punch above its weight. Through the war in Kosovo and 9/11, Blair's strategy seemed to work. But his alliance with George Bush in Iraq backfired, and Britons soured on what they saw as a grossly unequal relationship.

Brown had his own prescription for dealing with post-Empire malaise. Two years ago he launched a now all-but-forgotten "Britishness" campaign. Cynics saw it as a crass political ploy to counter his Scottishness. But it was more than that. If he didn't see the financial meltdown coming, he did see the social pressures that were building that would threaten the country's cohesion. At the time Britain was struggling to absorb the greatest wave of immigration in its history: in 2004 and 2005 alone more than 600,000 immigrants poured in, mostly from eastern Europe. In 2005, the 7/7 London bombings, carried out as they were by home-grown radicals, delivered a grim message to an anxious society: terrorism is being nurtured on British soil.

Brown's Britishness campaign looks to be all but shelved but a darkening economic mood threatens to revive British insecurities. Staving off a collective sinking feeling will not be easy. Some of the pillars that British identity once rested upon are long gone or substantially weakened: empire, the country's great industrial base, the monarchy and the Church of England. Even the English language suffers in its birthplace: it may dominate the globe but, according to a recent Home Office study, only 26% of the 1.3 million British residents of Pakistani and Bangladeshi descent are fluent in it. By choice as much as by accident of geography and history, Britain has become an outlier among world powers, an island in more ways than one. Unlike France or Germany, Britain's place in Europe does not help give it a settled identity; Britons are even less pro-European today than they were in the mid-1990s.

If the Europhile Blair saw Britain as a bridge between America and the continent, Brown seems disinclined to pursue a pro-European agenda (could electoral politics have anything to do with that?) and quite happy to push the British Isles even closer to the United States, especially if, with a general election due before the summer of 2010, he can somehow bask in Obama's glow. That would perhaps help Brown politically (or it could backfire) but retreating into the special relationship will do nothing to strengthen Britain's identity.

Surely looking inward, not outward and across the Atlantic, would provide a better path to national identity. For one thing, America is increasingly looking in other directions, to the east (China and Japan are the largest holders of US debt) and to the south (Mexico is the greatest single source of US immigration). More importantly, there's no reason for Britons to define themselves in American terms. The great strength of London a decade ago was its uniqueness, and if Britannia was cool, it was because it was different.

This country - which is my country, too, as a dual US-UK citizen - will do hope again some day. In search of optimism, it's worth revisiting that erstwhile emblem of New Britain, the Millennium Dome. After its grand (and widely panned) opening as the Millennium Experience on 31 December, 1999, the £789m project was all but abandoned, much like the disused east London gas works upon which it was built. Not a few people considered its mishandled opening on that chilly, rainy New Year's Eve to be the beginning of the end of Cool Britannia. Sure enough, the Dome went through any number of disappointing incarnations, from homeless shelter to funfair to the scene of a failed diamond heist. But now, improbably, it's back - as the successful O2 arena. It's a comeback worth recalling as we trudge through the coming months of recession and recrimination.

• Stryker McGuire was Newsweek's London Bureau Chief from 1996 to 2008. He is now the magazine's London-based contributing editor, the editor of International Quarterly and an associate at Lombard Street Research.

Britannia then and now

1996-7

Man in charge John Major was ousted by Tony Blair in May 1997.

Motto Things can only get better.

Art Young British Artists (YBAs): Damien Hirst, Tracey Emin and Sam Taylor-Wood. Saatchi and Jopling.

Music Britpop - Blur, Oasis, Pulp. Spice Girls.

Restaurants River Cafe, Terence Conran's Gastrodome.

Nightlife Superstar DJs and club culture, the Ministry of Sound, Groucho Club, Soho House.

People's princess Diana.

Drugs Ecstasy and weed; beginning of the slide in price of cocaine.

Exchange rates £1 = $1.69

Fashion McQueen and Galliano.

Regeneration hotspots London Docklands, Shoreditch, Edinburgh's Leith.

Public Enemy Estate agents.

2009

Man in charge Gordon Brown

Motto Keep calm and carry on.

Art MBAs (middle-aged British artists), Charles Avery, Darren Almond, Tomma Abts

Music Solo girls - Lily Allen, Amy Winehouse, Little Boots and Adele. Supergroup revivals, boutique commercial festivals (eg Bestival, Latitude), The X Factor

Restaurants Moro, Bistrotheque, Les Trois Garçons, The Fat Duck.

Nightlife Bungalow 8, burlesque nights, Cordy House, Shoreditch House.

People's princess Jade Goody.

Drugs Ketamine and MDMA; cocaine, heroin and crack widely, cheaply available; politicians, doctors and journalists talk of the dangers to mental health of super-strength marijuana (skunk).

Exchange rates £1 = $1.43/€1.08

Fashion Celebrity-endorsed high street collections.

Hotspots Manchester, Newcastle and Gateshead, Hackney.

Public Enemy Bankers.

21st-century cool: Abroad is better

Joanna Coles, British-born editor-in-chief of US Marie Claire

In 1997 Tony Blair had celebrity status because he was good at bringing different worlds together - music, drama, film, literature, politics. But Gordon Brown does not have Blair's celebrity cachet. Now it is all about Barack Obama, and New York and Los Angeles are both on bended knee to Washington. To be in New York after the collapse of Wall Street does not feel cool at all. All the newness - and newness is the essence of cool - is in DC.

It doesn't help that Barack is just not that interested in Britain. He has none of that lingering WASP snobbery about it that Reagan and George Bush Sr had. He has no desire to meet the Queen. His priorities are the American domestic economy and China, China, China.

Another cool place now is Mumbai thanks to Slumdog Millionaire and the emergence of India both culturally and economically as a world force.

The place to be Washington DC and Mumbai

Julian Gough, British-born author living in Berlin

Britain got culturally less interesting the richer it got over the last decade. Oasis, Blur and the YBAs came out of the dole culture of the Thatcher years; they did all their learning in poverty and then New Labour got into office and essentially took the credit for Thatcher's cultural revolution. For the past few years Berlin has been the underground cultural capital of Europe; economically it has been on it's knees for most of the century but apparently it has more artists per capita than any other city in the world. Because it's so cheap here the cost of failure seems much lower and that's important for creativity.

The place to be Berlin, especially around Warschauer Strasse.

Aravind Adiga, 208 Booker Prize winning novelist

Mumbai is a lot less cool than it was when I was a kid: now, young well-off Indians would prefer to live in Bangalore, or even Calcutta, which is going through a real renaissance. But internationally the places that are most alluring to young Indians are Shanghai and Dubai. In the midst of the recession they still seem to be growing. I used to live in New York but when I go back I have absolutely no desire to live there. I think India's such a fascinating place that once you've lived here it's difficult to leave.

The place to be Shanghai or Dubai

Detmar Blow, art dealer

The 90s were like the 60s. Everyone felt it was an important cultural decade, and I definitely felt a sense of history. But periods like that come around irregularly, they don't come every decade. When Issy's [his late wife Isabella Blow] career took off in the 90s she discovered Philip [Treacy] and then Alexander [McQueen] coming up in '92. So that was happening in fashion, and you had the YBAs in art, and then you had the music coming through with Britpop. It all came together.

One of my friends said: "The music's going to stop Detmar, but no one knows when." And now London's collapsed, like every other city.

In the art world, New York is definitely worse. I think Germany's doing quite well, and Portugal's doing well because it's a small country.

The place to be Lisbon

21st-century cool: London still rules

Sophia Kokosalaki, fashion designer

Britain is still incredibly cool, a world leader in every cultural field. I came here from Greece in 1996 at the height of "Cool Britannia" and I remember the Downing Street party and all the fuss. Just because we are not throwing the same parties does not mean exciting stuff is not happening. And one of the coolest things is that it is a truly multicultural society. People can come here from anywhere in the world and feel they belong.

The place to be Hackney

Vesna Maric, author

Growing up in Bosnia I dreamt about going to London; for me it's always been the place for music, fashion, youth culture. Because of the credit crunch there's a lot of talk about British society being too individualistic, but that's partly why there's so much innovation and creativity here - you can be who you want to be.

The place to be Dalston, especially Cafe Oto, or Hackney Wick, particularly the Schwartz Gallery

Gavin Turk, artist

When Sarah Lucas, Damien Hirst and Tracey Emin started to appear on the front of magazines and newspapers in the 90s it felt like something was really happening; the idea that artists could actually help sell a magazine was incredible. And, culturally, London is still vital. It's producing great new bands, advertising, media, films, TV comedy and there's an avant garde of sorts that is still working. London's biggest problem is that it's become impossible to travel around unless you cycle everywhere.

The place to be Vyner Street and Broadway Market, Hackney; Dalston

Toby Young, author of How To Lose Friends and Alienate People

Is Britannia still cool? I think these kinds of designations are meaningless. Vanity Fair's "Cool Britannia" issue was my idea and I effectively edited that issue of the magazine. Persuading the editors - and the reading public - that Britain was cool was simply a question of asserting this to be the case as emphatically as possible until they believed it. It does not surprise me one bit that Stryker has changed his mind.

The place to be Shepherd's Bush Green

Miquita Oliver, television presenter

My walk to school went past Damon Albarn's house: it was such a big deal. That "Cool Britannia" thing was around for about five years whereas now things happen for two weeks; stuff that's meant to be under-the-radar is quickly brought into the mainstream. I read [Blur's] Alex James's book recently and I was thinking, "God, we're not doing anything half as interesting as all that lot were doing." London's still got it though - you've just got to look in the right places. But I'm the one living in naff Shoreditch surrounded by people in suits, so what would I know?

The place to be Clapton

James Miller, British-born author now living in Buenos Aires

Brick Lane has become a bit of a cliché but having a rooted Bangladeshi community, and also a lot of artists and new media companies, gives it an edge. I don't think there's anywhere in Europe like it. Berlin is cool but London has more in terms of its diversity as well as the fact that it really is a global centre. It's still one of those connected places where it all happens.

The place to be Brick Lane

Interviews by Imogen Carter, Hermione Hoby and Lisa O'Kelly

• Read Stryker McGuire's original 1996 article on swinging London, at: newsweek.com/id/103313

What's your view? Has Britain lost its cool? Or is there still much to celebrate? Write to us at: review@observer.co.uk

ColinColin

Britain may need to have a national debate on university tuition fees, Theresa May’s most senior minister has said after urging the Tories to modernise to win over young metropolitan voters who backed Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour.

Damian Green said the current system, with fees capped at £9,250 a year, allows UK universities to deliver high quality courses and teaching, and accounts for the country’s disproportionate number of top institutions.

But the first secretary of state acknowledged that student debt is a “huge issue”, particularly after Labour unexpectedly eroded the Conservatives’ Commons majority in the general election after promising to scrap tuition fees.

The Guardian view on the Queen’s speech: In office but not in power | Editorial Read more

In a speech to the Bright Blue thinktank in central London on Saturday, Green urged the Tories to “change hard” to woo young, educated voters who backed Labour on 8 June.

Answering questions afterwards, he said the only way to bring down tuition fees while maintaining standards would be to raise taxes, but he acknowledged that could be the subject of a national conversation.

Asked about his message for students who backed Labour and are angry about being saddled with debt, Green said: “I think this is clearly a huge issue. I think in the long term we’ve got to show that they are getting value for the money.

“If we want to have 40%-plus of people going to university and if we want those university courses actually to be valuable, which I think is where the strain is often taken in European universities – you actually look at the teaching that you get in some European universities, you have lecture halls with 600 people in and things like that – it’s not actually as good a teaching and learning experience as you get in this country.”

He added: “If you wanted to say you want to reduce [fees] then either fewer people go to university or the experience would be less. Because the only other way you can get extra money to go in, if you wanted the same number of people, the same kind of teaching, would be to take it from working people through their taxes … it may well be that this is a national debate that we need to have.”

In a wide-ranging speech that will be seen as closely linked to May’s plans for government, Green appeared to criticise part of former PM David Cameron’s approach to modernisation, suggesting it was not necessarily about “hugging huskies, cuddling hoodie-wearing teenagers and PR stunts”. He did praise Cameron as a moderniser later in the speech.

Green acknowledged mistakes had been made during the general election campaign, describing discussions around the party’s social care policy, dubbed a “dementia tax” by critics, as “less than ideal”.

Thousands join anti-austerity march in central London Read more

And he said the Tories must now adapt to the changed political landscape or risk doing “serious long-term damage” to their electoral prospects. Green said: “In that classic Daily Telegraph slogan: Times Change, Values Don’t. Conservatives believe in free markets, individual liberty, a helping but not all-powerful state, strong defence and our traditional institutions as strongly as ever.

“But realistic Conservatives recognise that we need constant reform to defend those values. Fighting yesterday’s battles is a recipe for irrelevance. Tory reform is the route to a successful party, and more importantly a successful country.”

Green said the reason the Tories lost their majority in the June vote was because the party was 30 percentage points behind anti-austerity Labour among 18- to 35-year-olds.

But while acknowledging a need to tackle increasing hostility to capitalism, Green said the Tories would stick to their deficit reduction plan.

He said: “It is an inconvenient fact, all but ignored by the opposition, that the deficit is still far too high, so I am pleased we have renewed our commitment to restore the public finances by sticking to the fiscal rules announced by the chancellor in the autumn statement, which will guide us to a balanced budget by the middle of the next decade.”

However, Green said the Tories must provide answers to growing anti-austerity feelings that go beyond populism, highlighting plans to build 1.5m homes by 2022, devolve power and money locally through metro mayors and city deals, and an industrial strategy focused on new technology to give young people hope of a good job.

Green said: “The discontent with capitalism since the 2008 crash, which is vaguely expressed as being anti-austerity, needs to be tackled head-on.



“If young people feel the world is not giving them an even break, they look for radical change, even if what is being promised, by populists on the left or right, is just a better yesterday. Ukip hankers after the 1950s, Corbyn’s Labour the 1970s, with both hoping that nobody under 40 reads a history book and sees the glaring faults in those eras.”

ColinColin

Exclusive: insiders say ministers will have to choose between economic interests or sovereignty but Brexit department denies any change of mood

British officials have quietly abandoned hope of securing the government’s promised “cake and eat it” Brexit deal, increasingly accepting the inevitability of a painful trade-off between market access and political control when the UK leaves the EU.

Government insiders report a dramatic change of mood at the Department for Exiting the European Union (DExEU) since the general election, with growing Treasury influence helping force ministers to choose between prioritising economic interests or sovereignty.

Voters are hungry for new politics – bring on a leftwing Brexit | Rachel Shabi Read more

This is in stark contrast to the public position of both main political parties, first set out in the Theresa May’s Lancaster House speech in January, in which she echoed Boris Johnson’s boast that Britain can “have its cake and eat it” – enjoying full trade access without conceding over immigration, courts and payments. Labour’s Jeremy Corbyn sacked three shadow ministers on Thursday for departing from a similar position.

Yet UK civil servants are now said to be presenting ministers with a more binary choice: accept political compromises similar to aspects of the European Economic Area (EEA), or settle for a much more limited trade deal such as the recent EU-Canada free trade agreement (Ceta).

“We have a problem in that really there are only two viable options,” one official told the Guardian. “One is a high-access, low-control arrangement which looks a bit like the EEA. The other is a low-access, high-control arrangement where you eventually end up looking like Ceta – a more classic free trade agreement, if you are lucky.

“Of course the policy position remains the Lancaster House speech which says what we want is a high-access, high-control situation, but the author of that speech [reported to be Downing Street adviser Nick Timothy] is no longer in an influential position.”

New customs union with EU after Brexit is still an option, analysts say Read more

Though full EEA-style participation in the single market is seen as politically toxic due to its requirement to accept freedom of movement, pressure is building in Whitehall for a rethink of opposition to a customs union with the EU. This would satisfy many business leaders, who are clamouring for ways to avoid trapping manufacturers behind an inflexible tariff wall but possibly still allow new international trade deals to be pursued in the service sector.

“What we’ve seen post-election is that business voices that had felt bullied into silence pre-election are recovering their voice,” explained a senior official. “The economic arguments that had got lost in the last six months are now being heard again and those who had tried to railroad this by saying you are talking your country down are being given a run for their money.

“There are some ministers, such as the chancellor, who understand that and there are others who either don’t or are unwilling to,” the official added. “[Brexit secretary David Davis] is in the middle somewhere. His method of negotiating is always to be shameless in asking for something you can’t get because then you’ll end up in a place closer to what you want than if you start with a realistic offer ... but he is more pragmatic.”

A spokesman for the Brexit department denied there had been any change of mood since the election and said the approach outlined in the prime minister’s Lancaster House speech remained the government’s official strategy. Asked to respond to reports of ministers now being forced to consider a trade-off, the DExEU spokesman said they “did not recognise the language”.

But reports of the new mood of realism across Whitehall have been confirmed by at least two other officials at the highest levels of DExEU and the Treasury who have spoken privately.

Tensions burst into the open last week when Hammond gave a speech in Berlin warning against allowing “petty politics to interfere with economic logic” and publicly ridiculing the “cake and eat it” approach. Davis hit back by questioning the consistency of the chancellor’s calls for a transition phase.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Philip Hammond speaking at the Economy Day of the Economic Council in Berlin. Photograph: Bernd von Jutrczenka/AP

The Brexit secretary’s former chief of staff James Chapman this weekend claimed the Lancaster House speech had “hamstrung” the government with “absolutist” positions on red lines such as participation in the European court of justice.

Charles Grant, director of the Centre for European Reform, last week revealed the existence of an unpublished Treasury analysis showing that the costs of leaving without a customs union deal far outweigh any benefits from future overseas trade deals.

“The coalition of forces pushing for a softer Brexit is considerable,” Grant said. “The Treasury, long an advocate of retaining close economic ties to the EU, is newly emboldened.”

Terry Scuoler, chief executive of the Engineering Employers Federation, will meet Davis, Hammond and the business secretary, Greg Clark, on Friday at Chevening House in Kent, in a revived business summit that many view as another sign of the shifting mood.

“We are having a much more realistic conversation now,” said Scuoler, who will warn them not to “set about ideologically dismantling the best free trade agreement in the world”.

Internally, the influence of Treasury mandarins is said to be the decisive factor in sweeping away the pretence of a “cake and eat it” option, but the battle is now on to decide what replaces it.

“I don’t know where this will end up,” said one of the official sources. “The cabinet is pretty divided, but both sides of the argument are getting airtime. Quite a few people in the Conservative party, including the chancellor, [have] said that one of the reasons the election went the way it did is that the Conservatives abandoned their traditional territory of being the party of business and the economy.”

But insiders warn that the clock is now ticking to agree which vision will prevail before the first phase of EU negotiations is concluded over the summer.

“There is still a fudge and before we get down to negotiating in October/November we have got to decide once and for all which of those two options we are going for,” he added. “What you can’t do is sustain a fudge because then you are going into negotiations without knowing what you want.”

ColinColin

PM appears to suggest using international court of justice, not the ECJ, as the arbiter for those in the UK after Brexit

Theresa May has hinted at a compromise over the vexed issue of EU citizens’ future rights in the UK, suggesting they could be guaranteed in the international court of justice in The Hague.

The UK will publish the full details of what May has called a “fair and serious offer” to EU citizens on Monday, following the EU’s own opening offer on the subject in April.

Speaking in Brussels at the end of a two-day summit with the other 27 EU leaders, May said: “I want all those EU citizens who have made their lives and homes in our country to know that no one will have to leave. We won’t be seeing families split apart; people will be able to go on living their lives as before.”

One key potential sticking point is the EU’s insistence that the European court of justice must be the ultimate guarantor of the rights granted to EU citizens already living in the UK when Brexit happens in 2019.



As the Brexit vote turns one, leaving has never been more uncertain | Dan Roberts Read more

May, who fought a series of battles against the Luxembourg court as home secretary, has repeatedly made clear that extricating the UK from its oversight is a red line in the Brexit negotiations.

In her Conservative party conference speech last October, she said: “We will not have truly left the European Union if we are not in control of our own laws.”

Speaking as the Brussels meeting came to a close, she appeared to point to an alternative, saying: “From our point of view, these [rights] will be enshrined in UK law, they will be enforced by the highly respected UK courts and of course, if this is an aspect of the withdrawal treaty, it will be enshrined in international law as well.”

That could allow EU citizens to appeal for arbitration to an international body – perhaps the international court of justice in The Hague, which enforces international treaties.

The issue of ECJ oversight is also likely to come up when the UK begins negotiations over a future trade deal with the EU27. The ECJ enforces the rules of the single market, but the UK is likely to seek an alternative arbiter to oversee the “deep and special” deal it hopes to secure.

May outlined the broad principles of the UK’s offer on citizens’ rights at the end of a dinner with the other 27 EU leaders on Thursday night, before leaving to allow them to continue discussions without her.

At her press conference before returning to London, May insisted she had had “positive” reactions from some leaders, despite their lukewarm public comments.

And she underlined the fact that once Britain formally left the EU, controlling immigration would be a key priority. “I think what voters voted for when they voted to leave the EU was to ensure that, outside the European Union, the United Kingdom could establish our own rules on migration, from the EU into the UK, and that is exactly what we will be doing,” May said.

Since the snap election wiped out the Conservatives’ majority in parliament, senior figures on both sides of the Commons – including cabinet ministers – have underlined the importance of prioritising the economy, rather than immigration, in the negotiations, which formally began on Monday.

May’s emollient language about the offer to EU citizens appeared to mark a change in tone from the more combative approach to the talks she suggested during the election campaign, when she repeatedly called on the public to back her so she could “fight for Britain”.

It came after David Davis kicked off the talks by agreeing to the EU’s proposed timetable – with the exit bill, citizens’ rights and the future of Northern Ireland to be discussed first, before a trade deal can be thrashed out.

The Brexit secretary had previously said he expected the timetabling of the talks to be the “row of the summer”.

Full details of the UK’s offer to EU citizens will be set out in a government paper to be tabled before parliament this week, but the prime minister said EU citizens who arrive before Britain formally leaves in 2019 will be able to apply for a new “settled status” after five years, allowing them to acquire the same rights as UK nationals to pensions, benefits and the NHS.

May was speaking on the first anniversary of the Brexit referendum, which some of her pro-leave cabinet colleagues have called “independence day”.

Andrea Leadsom MP (@andrealeadsom) One year on... A fantastic, superb, amazing result for Britain & our future in the world! Happy #IndependenceDay @BorisJohnson @GiselaStuart pic.twitter.com/0UVRa6np8g

Andrea Leadsom, the leader of the Commons, tweeted that the referendum was a “fantastic, superb, amazing result”. Asked whether, one year on from the vote, she believed Brexit would be good for Britain, May said: “That’s exactly what we’re working for,” adding: “I believe in Britain, I believe in our opportunities as a country.”





ColinColin

James Landale and Robbie Gibb interviewed for the role after Katie Perrior quit before general election

Two senior figures from the BBC are in the race to become Theresa May’s new head of communications, including its high-profile diplomatic editor.

James Landale, who was previously the corporation’s deputy political editor, has been interviewed for the role as well as Robbie Gibb, who heads the BBC’s operations at Westminster, according to Downing Street sources.

May’s press team is currently short-staffed. Katie Perrior, the last director of communications, quit before the election. The strained atmosphere at Downing Street before the election also saw May’s press secretary, Lizzie Loudon, depart, although she has been replaced.

Previous holders of the job include Craig Oliver, who joined from the BBC after making his name revamping the News at Ten and running the BBC’s 2010 general election coverage. He took over from Andy Coulson, the former News of the World editor, who quit at the height of the phone-hacking scandal.

During the election campaign, May’s media campaign was headed by joint chiefs of staff Fiona Hill and Nick Timothy, who were criticised for being “rude, abusive and childish”. Both have left and been replaced by former MP Gavin Barwell.

Landale, a former newspaper journalist, is an Etonian near-contemporary of the former prime minister David Cameron. Before the 2015 general election, he successfully extracted a commitment from Cameron that he would not contest another election in an interview conducted in the kitchen of his Oxfordshire constituency home.

Gibb leads the BBC’s politics operations at Westminster, editing the Daily and Sunday Politics programmes.

Also believed to be in the running is Chris Wilkins, May’s director of strategy, who has been filling in after Perrior departed.

ColinColin

Private criminal prosecution against former PM was blocked last year by courts giving Blair immunity against criminal charges

The most senior judge in England and Wales will hear a case attempting to overturn a ban on prosecuting Tony Blair over the Iraq war, the Guardian has learned.



A private criminal prosecution against the former Labour prime minister was blocked in 2016 by Westminster magistrates court when it was ruled Blair would have immunity from any criminal charges.

But that ruling by the district judge, Michael Snow, will be reviewed on Wednesday before the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd, and Mr Justice Ouseley.

The current attorney general, Jeremy Wright QC, wants the block on proceedings upheld. He will have a barrister in court to try to stop the attempted private prosecution.



The hearing follows a decision by the high court in May, which has not previously been reported. Then a high court judge said those wanting to prosecute Blair could have a hearing to seek permission for a court order allowing their case to go to the next stage. The judge in that case also said the attorney general could formally join in the case.

Blair caused controversy when prime minister in deciding to take Britain into the invasion of Iraq in 2003, which was led by the US and sparked huge opposition.

The private prosecution seeks a war crimes trial in a British court of Blair, the foreign secretary in 2003, Jack Straw, and Lord Goldsmith, the attorney general at the time the government was deciding to join the invasion of Iraq.

The case seeks their prosecution for the crime of aggression. The attorney general in written submissions for Wednesday’s hearing says such an offence does not exist in English law, a claim which is disputed.

The private prosecution attempt is based on the findings of last year’s Chilcot report into the decision by Blair to join the invasion of Iraq, which is criticised, under the false pretext that Saddam Hussein’s regime had weapons of mass destruction.

After the Chilcot report was released some families of British service personnel who lost their lives in Iraq said they wanted Blair prosecuted in the courts.

This attempt at a private prosecution is brought by Gen Abdul-Wahid Shannan ar-Ribat, former chief of staff of the Iraqi army who is now living in exile. His lawyers are Michael Mansfield QC and Imran Khan, who acted for the family of Stephen Lawrence.

In November 2016, a British court ruled against an application to bring a private prosecution. A district judge at Westminster magistrates court ruled Blair had immunity from prosecution over the Iraq war and that any case could also “involve details being disclosed under the Official Secrets Act”.



At the hearing at the Royal Courts of Justice in central London, lawyers for the attorney general will argue that the crime of aggression, while existing in international law, has never been included into English law by parliament.

But the government’s stance appears to be undermined by Goldsmith. In his 2003 memo on the legality of the Iraq war, Goldsmith appeared to concede the key point of those now seeking his prosecution. “Aggression is a crime under customary international law which automatically forms part of domestic law,” he wrote.

At this stage Blair, Straw and Goldsmith are not making an arguments in court against the private prosecution, instead hoping the attorney general’s efforts will see it killed off.

ColinColin

