Kim Jong-un calls test a 4 July gift to ‘American bastards’ as US secretary of state urges action against regime and its workers

The US has ramped up pressure on North Korea after Tuesday’s successful intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) test, making a show of force off the Korean peninsula and warning that any country harbouring North Korean workers was abetting Kim Jong-un’s regime.



Officials in Seoul said the US-South Korean live-fire ballistic missile exercise early on Wednesday was intended as a warning to Pyongyang.

The South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, said it would demonstrate the allies’ determination to counter North Korean provocations with deeds and not just words of condemnation. “We need to clearly show our missile defence readiness to North Korea,” the presidential Blue House said in a statement.

The US secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, called for global action to counter an “escalation of the threat” posed by the regime. He warned that any country that hosted North Korean workers, or provided economic or military aid to Pyongyang, or failed to implement United Nations sanctions was “aiding and abetting a dangerous regime”.

He said in a statement: “Testing an ICBM represents a new escalation of the threat to the United States, our allies and partners, the region, and the world. All nations should publicly demonstrate to North Korea that there are consequences to their pursuit of nuclear weapons.”

Kim Jong-un delivered his own message on Wednesday, with the state Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) quoting him as saying: “American bastards would be not very happy with this gift sent on the July 4 anniversary.”

The news agency claimed the North Korean missile was capable of carrying a “large, heavy nuclear warhead” that could survive re-entry into the Earth’s atmosphere.



Kim was quoted as saying the North’s long confrontation with Washington had entered the “final stage” and that Pyongyang would not put its nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles up for negotiation “unless the US hostile policy and nuclear threats come to an end completely”.

A report in its state media said Kim urged his scientists to “frequently send big and small ‘gift packages’ to the Yankees”.

The UN security council is expected to meet on Wednesday for an emergency closed-door meeting, with the US and other countries to seek agreement on tougher measures against Pyongyang.



Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin are also expected to address growing North Korean provocations at their meeting on the sidelines of the G20 summit in Hamburg on Friday.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest North Korean leader Kim Jong-un looks on during the test-fire of intercontinental ballistic missile Hwasong-14 in this undated photo. Photograph: KCNA/Reuters

China is pushing for talks between world powers and North Korea on dismantling its nuclear program but the US maintains that Pyongyang must first halt its missile and nuclear tests. China and Russia have proposed that North Korea declare a moratorium on nuclear and missile tests while the US and South Korea refrain from large-scale joint military exercises.

Senior US and military officials accused North Korea of threatening the armistice that has maintained a shaky peace on the Korean peninsula since the end of the 1950-53 Korean war.



“Self-restraint, which is a choice, is all that separates armistice and war,” Gen Vincent K Brooks, commander of the US Forces Korea, and Gen Lee Sun-jin, chairman of the South’s joint chiefs of staff, said in a statement.

The South Korean Yonhap news agency quoted Lee as saying that South Korea and the US were maintaining “patience and self-restraint” despite the North’s repeated provocations.

Analysis by Japan and South Korea has supported the account given by North Korea’s Academy of Defence Science, which said the missile reached an altitude of 1,741 miles (2,802km) and flew 580 miles.

The US initially described it as an intermediate-range missile but now concedes it was an ICBM.

North Koreans have celebrated the ICBM launch in the capital, Pyongyang.

A 38-year-old Pyongyang resident named Ri Song-gil said his country “can attack anywhere in the world”. He added: “Now, the time when the US could threaten the world with nuclear weapons has passed away.”

Kim Hye-ok, 27, said the launch was “extremely delightful news”, adding that North Korea “will march forward along our own way” despite international sanctions.

David Wright, a US-based missile expert, estimated that the highly lofted missile could have a possible maximum range of 4,160 miles, which could put Alaska in its range if fired at a normal trajectory.

Hamish de Bretton-Gordon, a former commanding officer of the British Armed Forces Joint Chemical Biological Radiological Nuclear Regiment, said that “in capability of missile terms and delivery, it is a major step up and they seem to be making progress week on week.”

Questions remain about whether the North can miniaturise a nuclear weapon to fit a missile nosecone, or if it has mastered the technology needed for it to survive re-entry into the Earth’s atmosphere.

KCNA said Tuesday’s launch had verified “all the technological requirements including heat resistance and structural stability of the re-entry nosecone”, which it said was made of carbon composite.

“Under harsh conditions involving thousands of degrees of heat, pressure and tremors, the temperature inside the nose cone was stable between 25-45 degrees Celsius,” it said, adding the warhead “flew flawlessly and struck the target precisely”.

Some experts believe the North already has the ability to mount warheads on shorter-range missiles that can strike South Korea and Japan, home to dozens of US military bases and about 80,000 US troops.

Jeffrey Lewis, an expert on nuclear non-proliferation, said the US may have to accept that North Korea was close to crossing the “red line” of developing a nuclear weapon that can threaten parts of the US.

“The window for negotiating denuclearization is closed,” Lewis said. “The big point is that we have to accept North Korea with a nuclear-armed ICBM.”

ColinColin

Report by Theos warns that “astonishing” increase in exorcisms is doing harm to people with mental health problems

Exorcisms are a booming industry in the UK, partly driven by immigrant communities and Pentecostal churches, according to a report from a Christian thinktank.

However, the vast majority of people being exorcised have mental health problems that require psychiatric assistance, says the report, published on Wednesday by Theos.

The report calls for an analysis of “the burgeoning exorcism scene in the UK in the light of concerns over how it is being used and its possible negative consequences”.

It says the “astonishing increase in demand” has arisen “in defiance of any actual rules or procedures put in place by any church”. In 2012, the Church of England reissued guidelines on “good practice in the deliverance ministry”.

The Theos report – Christianity and mental health: theology, activities, potential (pdf) – does not reject the possibility of demonic possession. It says: “Certainly there is a biblical warrant for the dangers of demonic forces, and Jesus’ great commission to the disciples includes the explicit command to ‘cast out demons’. However, there is also need for serious caution.”

One danger was “Christian over-spiritualising” – a “tendency to ascribe anything and everything to spiritual causes when other medical ones may exist”. Another was a possible overlap between “demonic possession” and mental health issues.

One chaplain who described themselves as a “Bible-believing evangelical” told Ben Ryan, the report’s author, that “in all their experience with a mental health trust they had ‘never seen anything I would say that looked like demonic possession, but I’ve seen plenty of people who have been told that’s what they’re experiencing by other Christians’.”

The report says: “One of the frustrations of medical professionals with Christians comes from accounts and anecdotes of people with medical health issues going off their medication because they’ve been told that prayer is enough, and relapsing as a result.

“This is a classic example of well-meaning initiative with the potential for serious harm. It runs the risk of becoming a sort of spiritual abuse – which can be understood as psychological abuse inflicted upon the victim by members of their own religious group.”

Ryan told the Guardian that exorcism was “the serious end of a larger wedge. Some Christians are sometimes treating mental health issues as if everything is spiritual. So if someone tells a church leader they are suffering from depression, sometimes the response is that everything can be treated with prayer. The extreme end of that is exorcism.”

He said some charismatic and Pentecostal churches, particularly in areas with large west African communities, were advertising “healings” and exorcism outside their premises.

“If the church tells people that the problem is the demon inside you, and they perform an exorcism, but you don’t get better – and in fact you might get worse, believing you’ve failed to overcome the demon – that’s a form of spiritual abuse.”

A C of E spokesperson said: “Our guidelines state that particular caution needs to be exercised, especially when ministering to someone who is in a distressed or disturbed state.”

ColinColin

On Wednesday morning, North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, taunted the United States, saying the launch was a Fourth of July “gift” to the Trump administration. The Korean Central News Agency said the country’s citizens were happy with the “great timing” of their leader’s decision to “hit the arrogant Americans in the nose” by conducting the first ICBM test to coincide with Independence Day.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The American bastards must be quite unhappy after closely watching our strategic decision,” the news agency quoted Mr. Kim as saying after watching the missile test on Tuesday. “I guess they are not too happy with the gift package we sent them for the occasion of their Independence Day. We should often send them gift packages so they won’t be too bored.”

Mr. Kim made those remarks “with a guffaw,” the news agency said.

The joint missile exercise by the United States and South Korea was first proposed by the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, and endorsed by President Trump, Mr. Moon’s office said.

Acting on an American request, the United Nations Security Council, which has repeatedly penalized North Korea over its violations of a ban on nuclear and missile testing, will meet in an emergency session on Wednesday afternoon.

The United Nations secretary general, António Guterres, sharply criticized the North Korean launch. “This action is yet another brazen violation of Security Council resolutions and constitutes a dangerous escalation of the situation,” he said in a statement. Mr. Guterres called on North Korea to “cease further provocative actions and comply fully with its international obligations.”

Photo

The North Korean missile departed the Banghyon airfield in the northwestern town of Kusong and flew 578 miles before landing in the sea between North Korea and Japan, the South Korean military said in a statement. The American military said it remained aloft for 37 minutes.

While the North has made significant progress in its weapons programs, experts believe it cannot make nuclear warheads small enough to be mounted on ICBMs. Still, American policy makers have long seen just the development of an ICBM as a critical threshold the North should not be allowed to cross.

The missile test adds a volatile new element to the Trump administration’s efforts to curb North Korea’s nuclear ambitions, which have included naval drills off the Korean Peninsula and pressure on China, Pyongyang’s longtime ally. In a blunt phone call on Sunday, President Trump warned President Xi Jinping of China that the United States was prepared to act alone against North Korea.

If the missile took 37 minutes to fly 578 miles, that would mean that it had a highly lofted trajectory, probably reaching an altitude of more than 1,700 miles, said David Wright, co-director of the Global Security Program at the Union of Concerned Scientists.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Such a missile would have a maximum range of roughly 4,160 miles, or 6,700 kilometers, on a standard trajectory, he said. North Korea said the missile flew for 39 minutes.

“That range would not be enough to reach the lower 48 states or the large islands of Hawaii, but would allow it to reach all of Alaska,” Mr. Wright wrote in a blog post.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

But analysts also cautioned that although they had been impressed by the rapid and steady progress in the North’s missile programs, the long flight time itself did not suggest that North Korea had mastered the complex technologies needed to build a reliable nuclear-tipped ICBM, like the know-how to separate the nuclear warhead and guide it to its target.

By lofting some of its recent missiles to higher altitudes and letting them crash toward the earth at greater speeds, North Korea has claimed that it tested its “re-entry” technology, which can protect a nuclear warhead from intense heat and vibrations as it crashes through the atmosphere.

North Korea announced the latest missile launch in a broadcast on state television after a series of patriotic music videos. “As a proud nuclear power that possesses not only nuclear weapons but also the most powerful ICBM that can target any part of the world, North Korea will root out the United States’ threat and blackmail of nuclear war and solidly defend the peace and stability of the Korean Peninsula and the region,” its statement said.

North Korea called the test “a momentous event in the history of the country.”

Before the announcement, Mr. Trump had noted the missile launch on Twitter, suggesting that it was time for China to act decisively against the North and “end this nonsense once and for all.” On Tuesday, Chinese officials criticized the missile test, saying it violated United Nations rules.

Video

But the Chinese government offered no signs that it was preparing to take more drastic action against the North, urging a return to diplomatic talks instead.

“I have to reiterate that the current situation in the Korean Peninsula is complicated and sensitive,” Geng Shuang, a spokesman for China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, said at a regular news conference in Beijing. “We hope all sides concerned can remain calm and restrained so that tensions can be eased as soon as possible.”

Later in Moscow, where President Xi of China was visiting, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said both had agreed to advance a joint proposal to settle the Korea crisis by simultaneously freezing the North’s nuclear and missile programs and the joint military drills by the United States and South Korea.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Russia — which, like China, borders North Korea — has repeatedly called for a diplomatic solution. Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov warned that the launch would give “more arguments to those who seek pretexts for new escalation of tensions,” according to the Interfax news agency.

Mr. Trump is to meet this week with both Mr. Putin and Mr. Xi at a Group of 20 meeting in Germany, and Cheng Xiaohe, an associate professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing, said the missile test would force them to find some kind of common ground on North Korea. He did not specify what that might be, but he suggested that it would now be harder for Mr. Xi to stand by Pyongyang.

“Certainly the test will change the game,” Professor Cheng said. “The business-as-usual situation is over.”

Other analysts said the launch would put Mr. Trump’s administration in a precarious position, given that it had indicated that such a missile, capable of reaching parts of the United States, was a critical threshold. In January, Mr. Trump declared on Twitter, “It won’t happen!”; the message set off a cascade of speculation on what exactly he meant.

“The important thing is that Donald Trump doesn’t let himself be backed into a corner and that he understands that there are long-term options to contain, constrain and deter the regime,” said Adam Mount, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress in Washington.

The United States had hoped North Korea would stop short of developing a long-range missile that could reach its shores, Mr. Mount said. Now, he said, the United States and its allies will have to compromise on any expectation that North Korea will ever give up its nuclear program, he added.

“Talks can’t proceed from the presumption of denuclearization,” he said. “And we can’t coerce North Korea back to the negotiating table to prevent them from crossing a threshold they have already crossed.”

ColinColin

High summer is migrant season in the Mediterranean. In rising numbers, men, women and children set off in the flimsiest of craft for Italy. So far this year, according to the International Organization for Migration, at least 2,000 people have drowned in the attempt. This is made all the worse by the equivocation and even the hostility of EU states which make little show of solidarity; today Austria announced it was ready to send troops and tanks to stop migrants crossing the border from Italy. The Mediterranean is already the world’s worst maritime cemetery. Italy, which finds itself on the receiving end of this migration, urgently needs more European support than is currently on offer. Lest anyone doubt it, this applies to the UK government too: last year, only 13,000 asylum claims were granted.

The numbers are not as staggering as they were, but this year’s migration crisis is no less tragic and no less diplomatically fraught. The number entering Europe by sea so far is 100,000, half last year’s number for the same period. Four-fifths of them arrived in Italy. Migrant centres are overwhelmed. The Italian government says the situation is “unbearable”. Last week it threatened to close its ports to ships used by NGOs to rescue migrants. It wants other coastline states – Spain and France – to offer points of arrival. A flurry of EU meetings – with another one due on Thursday in Tallinn – has so far produced little concrete help, while a proposed EU “code of conduct” for NGOs risks limiting their action. NGOs are furious that their humanitarian work has been described as creating a “pull factor”: they say that is finger-pointing rather than tackling the real issues.

It is to Italy’s credit that, in 2013, it became the first European country to launch a life-saving operation, Mare Nostrum. Since then, search and rescue operations have been internationalised. But little has been done to make the welcoming effort a genuinely Europe-wide one. Refugee relocation plans have been more of a concept than a reality. To date, an EU plan originally intended for tens of thousands has led to the resettlement of only 7,354 people from Italy. Yet, although Italy’s frustration is understandable, blocking humanitarian ships cannot be the right answer. There are more sustainable solutions. It is lack of political will that makes them unattainable. EU migration policies need to be overhauled. Fear of a populist backlash leaves governments wary of creating the safe, legal routes that would allow an orderly processing of asylum claims. Not all migrants are entitled to asylum, but all asylum claims must be fairly examined. Crisis management that centres on border control, even if it is pushed back to Libya’s southern borders, is not enough. Outsourcing the problem to Libya’s coastguards or militias only makes it worse.

The UNHCR says there is “no slowing down” of migrant movements to Libya. That is likely to mean ever larger numbers trying to travel the central Mediterranean route to Europe. Last year’s EU-Turkey agreement managed to stem migrant and refugee movements across the Aegean Sea, but to a large extent it has only displaced the problem. It is no surprise that Libya, a country of three competing governments, plunged in internal chaos, has become a network of ruthless and sometimes murderous traffickers, and the new flashpoint.

The mounting concerns of the centre-left government in Rome may not be motivated only by human tragedy, but also by the fear that uncontrolled migration will help either the far right or the Five Star movement make gains in the coming elections. Europe has a collective interest in thwarting such an outcome, just as it does in upholding its commitment to the principle of asylum. That can only be done through coordination across the EU. Migration is a long-term problem. But with the so-called summer season under way, pledges of solidarity must urgently be translated into action. Italy’s problems are not only Italian but European too.

ColinColin

Austria has announced it is ready to use soldiers and tanks to stop migrants crossing its border with Italy, as Brussels urged Europe to help Italian authorities manage an “unprecedented” arrival of people from north Africa.

Austrian defence minister Hans Peter Doskozil announced that four Pandur armoured personnel carriers had been sent to the Tyrol region and 750 troops were on standby.

Speaking to the Kronen Zeitung, Doskozil said troops on the Brenner pass would be “indispensable” if large numbers of people continued to arrive in Italy from the central Mediterranean. He told the popular daily newspaper that border controls on the busy Alpine pass would be reintroduced very soon, although his office said no timetable for the measures was fixed.

Austria and Italy are both part of the EU’s border-free Schengen zone, which eliminates passport checks at the frontier. Many countries reintroduced some border controls after 1 million refugees and migrants arrived in Europe in 2015.

Migration is a highly charged topic in Austria and Italy, which both face elections in the next 12 months.

A record number of people are expected to cross the Mediterranean sea in 2017, with arrivals 20% higher than this time last year. Since January, 85,183 people have arrived in Italy, compared with 71,279 last year, according to the latest data from the International Organization for Migration. A total of 2,150 are reported to have drowned in the central Mediterranean this year.

Franz Kompatscher, the mayor of Brenner, said the town had not yet seen troops, but fears had risen after a large number of arrivals in southern Italy, in the run-up to snap elections in October.

“There isn’t a problem with migrants here, it’s not like it was last year,” Kompatscher said. “Very few come here now because they know it’s very difficult to cross the border. Some do manage to cross, but it’s not easy.

“But again, people are also worried because they see that politicians aren’t doing anything to control this situation.”

Frans Timmermans, a European commission vice-president, said Italy’s call for solidarity was completely justified and urged other EU member states to meet their promises of housing refugees in Italy under an EU relocation scheme. “It would make a world of difference if member states would just do what they agreed before.”

He was clear that Brexit did not exempt the UK from taking part in a new refugee relocation scheme, as the commission announced a plan to bring asylum seekers from Libya, Egypt, Ethiopia and Sudan to Europe. “This is an exercise we need to do at a European level and I count on solidarity from all member states including the United Kingdom.”

Details of the plan remain sketchy, but the idea is similar to a scheme for Syrian refugees in Turkey. European countries have taken in 16,500 Syrian asylum seekers from Turkey, an initiative the UK supported. A parallel scheme to relocate refugees from camps in Italy and Greece has lagged far behind a 160,000 target, as some central European countries have refused to take part.

The EU executive also gave its backing to plans for a controversial code of conduct to govern NGOs that rescue migrants at sea. Italy wants to subject NGOs that undertake search and rescue operations in the central Mediterranean to the control of Italian and Libyan coastguards.

On Tuesday, the EU executive endorsed the general idea of a code of conduct, while calling on the Italian authorities to work with NGOs to draw it up. But UN agencies gave the plans a withering response, while accusing Nato and commercial shippers of ignoring the duty of rescuing people at sea.

“Quite often we see shipping companies switching off their GPS system … in order not to rescue people. This is also happening on a daily basis in the Mediterranean sea,” said Vincent Cochetel, the head of the UNHCR’s Europe office.

In unusually pointed language, he turned the spotlight on Nato frigates in the Mediterranean, namely Operation Sea Guardian, a plan to boost security on the seas and combat terrorism.

“Can you tell me how many ships operating under Nato Operation Sea Guardian, have been rescuing people at sea from the central Mediterranean over the last two or three years? Has that happened? Can we have a code of conduct for military ships cruising through the central Mediterranean?”

Eugenio Ambrosi, the director of the Europe office of the International Organization for Migration in Europe, said Europe was on “a very slippery slope” with the proposed code of conduct. “What is the problem with NGOs? I was asking myself the same question. I don’t know … I know that they are saving lives and I know that that is an imperative.

“Member states also have a code of conduct – it is called European law, including the duty and obligation to show solidarity in fact and not in words.”

He said the EU was too fixated on arrival numbers and was neglecting why people made the journey and the plight of 240,188 internally displaced people in Libya, forced to leave their homes after the country collapsed into civil war.

Migration is one of the most divisive issues for the EU, with countries deadlocked over how to reform the bloc’s asylum rules. Meanwhile member states along the EU’s Mediterranean border have accused some northern neighbours of not doing enough to help in the immediate crisis. Some EU officials counter that Italy and Greece have not done enough themselves in the past, pointing to slow procedures to deal with refugees and migrants.

The latest Brussels plan calls for Italy to open more detention centres and increase the number of people returned to their country of origin if they fail to qualify for asylum. The measures will be discussed by EU home affairs ministers in Tallinn on Thursday.

ColinColin

The Italian government is considering blocking boats carrying migrants from landing at its ports after nearly 11,000 refugees arrived on its shores in five days.

It has been reported that the government has given its ambassador to the EU, Maurizio Massari, a mandate to raise the issue formally with the European commission to seek permission for a drastic revision of EU asylum procedures. One idea being discussed is denying docking privileges to boats not carrying Italian flags that seek to land in Italian ports, mainly in Sicily or Calabria.

Angela Merkel and Donald Trump head for clash at G20 summit Read more

Italy is the main point of arrival for mostly African migrants to European shores this year, and more boats are sent out almost daily. All of those rescued off the coast of Libya are brought to Italy, often by private charities.

Meanwhile, Italy’s neighbours have closed their borders to try to keep migrants from moving north, as they did in the past, and some EU partners such as Poland and Hungary have refused to host some asylum-seekers to ease the burden on Italy and Greece, another frontline country.

The surge in the number of refugees reaching Italy prompted the interior minister, Marco Minniti, to turn back on a flight to Washington to address the crisis. An intense debate has raged in Italy about whether NGOs waiting to rescue people off Libyan coastal waters were acting as an incentive for people-smugglers.



The centre-right fared well in local government elections at the weekend, putting pressure on the left-leaning coalition government ahead of elections next year.

Mattia Toaldo, an expert on Libya at the European Council on Foreign Relations described the move to block boats from docking in Italy as “a panic measure”.

“I would very much be surprised if it is legal,” he said. “The law requires the rescue of people in distress on the high seas, and this self-blockade of Italian ports would leave migrants floating in the Mediterranean, including those in most NGO rescue ships.



“It is most likely designed to force Europe to take some kind of other action. It also shows that the ideas tried so far have failed. It was first proposed that the Libyan coastguard take more action to push the boats back. It was then suggested the tribes in southern Libya act as detention guards, and then it was proposed to take action in Niger. Nothing has worked.”

The dramatic rise in numbers, prompted by good weather and a well-organised trafficking route, will attract greater scrutiny for German chancellor Angela Merkel’s plans for a long-term solution to the migration crisis. Efforts to strengthen the Libyan coastguard by providing extra boats and training appears to have had little impact.



The EU’s 28 leaders agreed last week that Italy and Greece should get more help to manage arrivals. The bloc’s executive European commission will give more emergency funding to Italy and wants EU states to put up more money to assist African countries, an EU official said, hoping that better conditions at home will keep people from leaving.

In the four days between 24 and 27 June, 8,863 migrants arrived in Italy, including more than 5,000 on Monday alone, according to the International Office for Migration. A further 2,000 people were reported to have arrived on Tuesday.

The June surge comes after the arrival of 60,228 migrants in Italy by sea in the first five months of 2017, with 1,562 reported to have died in the Mediterranean. The number of migrants from Libya this year is on course to exceed the 200,000 recorded last year.

There were 22,993 arrivals in May. Since the beginning of 2016, only July and October last year have seen higher numbers of arrivals by sea. Nigerian is the first declared nationality of around 15% of those arriving in 2017, followed by Bangladeshi (12%), Guinean (10%) and Ivorian (9%).

Renato Brunetta of the Forza Italia party, has pressed Minniti to block ships with migrants heading to Italy and ask the EU to allow them to be diverted to other Mediterranean ports.

Merkel fears that long-term demographic trends mean 100 million Africans could be driven to Europe by climate change and poverty, an eventuality for which European governments are unprepared.

Her guiding idea is to stem migration by combating poverty in Africa. Her specific initiative is to team up African nations committed to economic reforms with private investors who would then bring jobs and businesses. Under the G20 compacts plan, an initial seven African nations would pledge reforms to attract more private sector investment.

Reuters contributed to this report

ColinColin

New rules drawn up by Italy likely to bring NGOs under coast guard control, which they fear will hamper rescue attempts

Charities that rescue migrants and refugees from the Mediterranean have reacted angrily to plans to make them subject to a new code of conduct drawn up by Italy and endorsed by other EU countries.



The move is likely to bring them under the control of the Libyan and Italian coast guards, which might constrain their ability to save passengers from overcrowded and unseaworthy smuggling boats.

Italy considers closing its ports to boats carrying migrants Read more

The Italian government, which is under intense political pressure over the surge in refugee numbers, convened an emergency meeting with France and Germany in Paris on Sunday.

The three countries are considering extra funding, as well as efforts to reduce what they describe as the “pull factor” created by the presence of NGOs (non-government organisations) in the Mediterranean.

But a proposal by Italy to unilaterally close its ports to ships containing migrants is expected to be shelved because it is in clear breach of international maritime law.

Some Italian politicians and the Libyan coast guard have complained for months that the NGOs’ presence just outside Libyan waters encourages migrants to risk the perilous journey to Italy.

One leading NGO organiser reacted incredulously to criticism of his organisation’s rescue work. Oscar Camps, the founder of the Catalan group Proactiva Open Arms, tweeted: “You are a ‘pull factor’; you deal with traffickers, you finance the mafias, the taxi drivers of the seas, and you will close the ports to us. [And] we are the problem?”

Activists point to the loss of 2,000 migrants lives this year as proof that their work is necessary. In March, several NGOs drew up a voluntary code of conduct, stressing the importance of humanitarian goals, independence from government and the need for coordination.

The Italian civil society forum AOI expressed its deep concern over the plan, saying that any proposal to limit the NGOs’ freedom will damage their ability to save lives and reduce their funding. It added that numerous inquiries had said allegations that they were colluding with the smugglers were unfounded.



But a spokesman for the Libyan coast guard claimed the NGOs were acting inside Libyan coastal waters in breach of international law. More than 84,000 migrants have landed in Italy this year, and 12,000 in the past few days. The past three years have shown June to September to be when migrants numbers peak.

Libyan coast guard spokesman Ayyoub Qasem accused the NGOs of “encouraging illegal immigrants – who flock to Libya from over 30 African countries – and not worrying at all about Libya’s sovereignty over its territory and its territorial waters.”

He claimed the rescue groups were acting in open violation of Libyan maritime sovereignty, adding that the number of migrants embarking from Libya had risen 20% since last year despite measures designed to reduce the flow. “This is a clear indication that the measures taken to stop or reduce the phenomenon are partly wrong – or rather increase the number of migrants and smugglers,” he said.

Some of the ships operating on behalf of charities are registered in Germany, Spain or Malta, but most of them disembark refugees in southern Italy – one of the causes of political resentment in parts of Italy.

A new code would be matched by extra funding from the Libyan coast guard, said the EU commissioner for migration Dimitris Avramopoulos. He said specific proposals will be put in front of the EU College of Commissioners on Tuesday before an informal meeting of EU interior ministers in Estonia due to start on Thursday.

Italian prime minister Paolo Gentilioni claimed the emergency meeting in Paris had produced some initial concrete results, but said the status quo was not sustainable. The Italian government fears the first and second wave of its reception centres are full, requiring a third wave to be built, and is eager for other countries to share its burden.



The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said it was not realistic for Italy to take all the migrants from Libya. It warned in a major study of Libyan smuggling networks: “Irregular migration through Libya is unlikely to slow down, given the current political and security stalemate in the country and neighbouring states, the continuing drive for a better life, the increasing professionalisation of the smuggling industry and the significant profitability of the route between Libya and Italy.”



ColinColin

In Britain the talks are mainly remembered for the death of Ian Tomlinson, but they did secure an economic rescue package

The G20 London summit in 2009 was arguably the peak of Gordon Brown's term as prime minister, and he was prepared to stake his reputation on it. The world economy was in a tailspin and facing disaster to match the 1930s, but Brown had a plan which he had compared to the Bretton Woods agreement that shaped the world's postwar economic infrastructure.

The summit logo reflected those ambitions, depicting a new dawn breaking and the three words: stability, growth, jobs. Four years on, however, its place in history does not look quite so momentous.

In Britain it is probably remembered more for the protests against the global leaders and for the death of Ian Tomlinson, a newspaper vendor who collapsed soon after being shoved to the ground by riot police.

But the summit did succeed in getting things done, including a $1 trillion injection of funds that at least helped stabilise the global economy's rate of descent, and kept protectionism at bay. Brown's reputation for providing leadership and ideas on the world stage was on the whole enhanced was by the event. It was a nail-biting few days for Downing Street as it sought to manage rifts over the economy rescue package, particularly opposition from France and Germany, who argued economic stimulus should not come at the expense of regulation to rein in the excesses of the market.

At one point, the French president at the time, Nicolas Sarkozy, threatened to walk out, but compromises were found and tempers soothed.

The key to Brown's approach was to build up momentum before the summit behind the stimulus he and the newly elected Barack Obama favoured. The European participants met in February 2009 in Berlin in an attempt to reconcile their internal differences. Brown also travelled further afield to the US, Brazil, Argentina and Chile in the days immediately leading up to the summit to build up a loose coalition behind the stimulus plan. The meticulous preparation paid off, for a while, but Brown's political fall was put off for just another year.

ColinColin

The prospect of sitting down to hamburgers with Kim Jong-un, as aired by Donald Trump, is not appetising. But North Korea’s latest missile launch should remind the United States that it can’t wait for him to eat humble pie, nor expect China to take his lunch away.

Pyongyang’s bold claims of a successful intercontinental ballistic missile test don’t have to be absolutely accurate to be alarming. The US military has suggested it was an intermediate-range missile, though others believe it was an ICBM. It was not “capable of hitting anywhere in the world”, but at least one analyst judged it capable of reaching Alaska. It demonstrates that North Korea’s programme is gathering pace, even if important technical challenges remain. Pyongyang has now launched more major missiles in the last three years than in the previous three decades. Mr Trump had already warned that “patience is over”; the Obama administration’s waiting game failed to hold back the grains in the hourglass.

“Time is not on our side,” former US senior officials with extensive experience of Pyongyang warned the president last week, urging him to engage in dialogue. The regime is not suicidal, but a miscalculation or mistake could bring nuclear catastrophe to the region, they told him. Technological solutions – disabling launches through electronic or cyber attacks, or intercepting missiles – will be at best only partially successful. Sanctions may be part of the answer, but history shows that they are not in themselves a solution. The administration has flirted repeatedly with military options, and there is a grave risk that its interest in them may revive, despite the immense dangers. The prospects of destroying the nuclear arsenal – still less conventional stockpiles – would be low, the prospects of devastating repercussions for Seoul high and the chances of a wider destabilisation of the region significant.

For now, the US appears to be focusing on yet more sanctions, and pressure on China – though it is hard to know whether arms sales to Taiwan and the mooting of trade restrictions are an attempt to twist Beijing’s arm, or an acceptance of the fact that it is not “put[ting] a heavy move” on its neighbour, as Mr Trump had hoped. And while China could make North Korea collapse, it cannot make it change course. It does not want a failed state and US troops on its border. Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin reiterated their preferred course on Tuesday: dialogue, a freeze on tests on Pyongyang’s part, and the suspension of military drills by Washington and Seoul. That was not so much a way forward as an attempt to head off the US.

Beijing and Moscow have a useful part to play. So too does South Korea, where new president Moon Jae-in seeks better relations with the North, and Japan. But Pyongyang’s real interest is in the US, and specifically in the prospect of a security guarantee. The North was flattened by US bombs in the Korean war; and the Iraq war spurred its commitment to its arms programme. The missile was launched on the eve of the US’s Independence Day, not China’s National Day. Mr Kim does not want a banquet with Xi Jinping, but a place at the table with Mr Trump.

Both as a candidate and as president, Mr Trump has toyed with the idea of meeting Mr Kim; last month the North Korean ambassador to India again mooted the possibility of bilateral talks and a freeze on nuclear and missile tests. Such a prospect looks even more distant and less palatable following the case of Otto Warmbier, the US student detained in the North and released, in a coma, only days before his death. Turning low-level, informal talks into negotiations and then a deal would be harder still. But as the former US officials stressed, opening dialogue is neither a reward nor a concession to North Korea; it is simply the only realistic way to reduce the growing dangers. The prospect of Pyongyang triumphing in its programme, or of a conflagration on the peninsula, should be even harder to swallow.

ColinColin

This image made from video of a news bulletin aired by North Korea’s KRT on Tuesday, July 4, 2017, shows what was said to be North Korea leader Kim Jung Un, center, using binoculars to watch the launch of a Hwasong-14 intercontinental ballistic missile, ICBM, in North Korea’s northwest. Independent journalists were not given access to cover the event depicted in this photo. North Korea claimed to have tested its first intercontinental ballistic missile in a launch Tuesday, a potential game-changing development in its push to militarily challenge Washington — but a declaration that conflicts with earlier South Korean and U.S. assessments that it had an intermediate range. (KRT via AP Video) (Associated Press)

SEOUL, South Korea — If North Korea’s claim Tuesday of its first ICBM test-launch is true, it has barreled over a red line that the world has long called a tripwire for potential nuclear disaster.

As always with North Korea, however, it’s hard to tell how wide the gulf is between reality and rhetoric.

Analysts, for instance, believe the latest missile may be able to hit Alaska, a marked improvement on past efforts and potentially placing it in the intercontinental ballistic missile category, but far from backing North Korea’s claim it can now “strike anywhere on Earth.”

Skeptics will also ask how North Korea can claim mastery of such a complicated technology after only one test.

That said, the message from North Korea seems clear: If not stopped, it is now only a matter of time before one of the most dogged countries on Earth achieves its goal of being able to hit all parts of the United States.

Here is what Tuesday’s potentially game-changing claim might mean:

___

WHY IT MIGHT BE AN ICBM

The claim has the air of the inevitable for some North Korea watchers.

The country has, with single-minded determination, been devoting its best and brightest, and a huge amount of its tiny financial resources, to this goal for generations.

The pace has quickened dramatically under leader Kim Jong Un, who took over in 2011. Since late 2012, North Korea has placed two satellites into orbit with long-range rockets, which outsiders see as clandestine tests of missile technology.

Last year, North Korea conducted its fourth and fifth atomic bomb tests and claimed a series of technical missile and atomic breakthroughs.

After what North Korea said in March was a ground test of a new type of high-thrust rocket engine, Kim Jong Un was quoted as saying that the “whole world will soon witness what eventful significance the great victory won today carries.”

Outside analysts say the missile’s potential range, if fired at a normal trajectory, could be more than 6,000 kilometers (3,750 miles), which would make it technically an ICBM.

___

WHY IT MIGHT NOT BE

It is difficult, maybe impossible, for outsiders to understand exactly what happened in the launch.

“It’s something that only North Koreans would know,” said Kwon Sejin, a professor at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in South Korea.

Maj. Gen. Cho Han Gyu, director of operations at South Korea’s Joint Chiefs of Staff, told a televised briefing that the missile showed an improved range over an intermediate-range missile North Korea tested on May 14. But he said South Korean and U.S. intelligence authorities are trying to determine if the North had indeed fired an ICBM.

Some doubt whether North Korea has mastered the technology needed to build a re-entry vehicle that is crucial for returning a warhead to the atmosphere from space so it could hit its intended target. Or whether North Korea can build a warhead small enough to fit on a long-range missile.

Chae Yeon-seok, a professor at South Korea’s University of Science and Technology, said radar and satellites can track a missile’s flight but not the specifics of the missile’s technology. “We cannot verify if a warhead lands in the ocean without any problem,” he said.

___

WHY IT DOESN’T REALLY MATTER

Persistence.

North Korea, whose ethos of self-reliance is akin to a national religion, has for decades sought to build weapons that can combat U.S. and South Korean “hostility.”

Nothing has stopped the country’s tenacious progress — not sanctions, not threats, not diplomacy.

A U.S. and South Korean attack would end North Korea’s ruling class, but it would also kill huge numbers of South Koreans who live an easy drive from the world’s most heavily armed border.

This means that without finding the right solution, it may only be a matter of time before reality matches North Korea’s propaganda, which on Tuesday called the test the “final step toward completing the nation’s nuclear military strength.”

___

Associated Press writer Hyung-jin Kim contributed to this report.

Copyright 2017 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

ColinColin

Supporters of new president-elect gather outside the Louvre to mark his win – but the mood is curiously subdued after a long and difficult election campaign

Emmanuel Macron delighted the crowds who had turned the esplanade outside the Louvre Museum in Paris into a sea of fluttering tricolor flags on Sunday night by taking the stage to the sound of Beethoven’s Ode to Joy – the European Union anthem.

They roared their approval as the victorious centrist candidate took to the stage to tell supporters “a new page has been turned in our history”.

The crowds started what promised to be an all-night celebration the moment the provisional result was announced at 8pm local time; the moment they and much of liberal France breathed a collective sigh of relief.

What happens now that Macron has been elected French president? | Kim Willsher Read more

Macron supporters gathered around the famous glass pyramid, where they watched the new president-elect give his victory speech at his campaign headquarters the other side of Paris.

A few hours later, he was there in person, looking serious and presidential as he strode across the Louvre courtyard to the stage. “Macron president. Macron president,” they cheered.

“Thank you my friends,” he told them. “What we have done for the last many months has no precedent or equivalent. Everyone said it was not possible but they didn’t know France.”

It was a sombre address for a celebration party. Macron said he accepted many had voted for him even though they disagreed with his programme to “defend the republic against extremism”. “I will protect the republic,” he told the crowd.

Brigitte Macron: ever present beside France's presidential hopeful Read more

When he mentioned those who had voted for Marine Le Pen, there were boos and whistles. “No, don’t whistle them,” Macron said. “They have expressed today their anger and dismay – and sometimes convictions. I respect that. But I will do everything I can in the next five years so there is no reason to vote for extremes.

“Tonight, there is only the reunited people of France. The world is watching us. Europe and the world. I will serve you with love.”

On cue, his wife Brigitte came on stage followed by other members of his family, friends and election campaigners. After blowing kisses to the crowd, France’s new president led the crowd in a vigorous rendition of La Marseillaise.

Macron, 39, a former banker and economy minister running as an independent centrist, is economically liberal, socially progressive, globally minded and upbeat.



Having been accused of prematurely celebrating after his presidential first round success two weeks ago, it was clear he was not going to make the same mistake twice.

Play Video 1:24 Emmanuel Macron gives victory speech vowing to unite France – video

His first victory speech, delivered at his campaign headquarters, was sober, calm and short. He spoke of a “big honour and an immense responsibility”. He said he was speaking to all of France’s citizens, not just those who had voted for him. Perhaps pointedly, he said he was sending “republican greetings” to Marine Le Pen.

Macron said he was aware of the “anger, anxiety and doubt” that many French citizens felt and expressed in their vote. He said he would be “implacable and entirely resolved” in defending their security. “I will defend France, its vital interests, its image,” he said.

His primary task over the coming five years, he added, was to “calm people’s fears, restore France’s confidence, and gather all its people together to face the immense challenges that face us”.

Supporters had begun gathering outside the Louvre late in the afternoon, but security checks meant many people were still outside when the result was announced. The organisers had planned for 10,000 and numbers swelled dramatically as the night drew in.

Despite the party music, live bands, DJ and dancing girls, the crowd often seemed reticent and subdued. Macron’s supporters seemed happy, emotional, but not entirely overjoyed; an atmosphere reflecting the sense that the country had sailed very close to a perilous wind and gone through an experience that had left many traumatised.

To the last minute, there had been fears and uncertainty. For weeks, the polls had pointed to a Macron victory – but as everyone kept saying, the polls had got it wrong with Donald Trump and with the UK’s Brexit vote.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Emmanuel Macron stands with his wife Brigitte in front of supporters outside the Louvre. Photograph: Philippe Wojazer/AP

Shortly before the result was announced, one Parisian, Daniel, who said he was retired and worked as a charity volunteer, said it had been nerve racking. “I can only hope it’s a convincing victory so he has some legitimacy. It was terrible when the FN [Front National] got into the second round in 2002 and then were beaten. We thought it had been seen off. And here we are again. We need him to have a convincing victory.”

Ben Lounis, 39, a radiologist, who was born in Algeria, had brought his three children to celebrate at the Louvre. As the children, aged between six and 10, waved flags, he said: “I am very satisfied with the result. France has avoided the worst. I feel Mr Macron is an interesting and intelligent young man and I hope he will bring lots of good things to France and the whole world.

“I hope that under him we can find ourselves in a multi-cultural France where we regard each other as human beings. I have three children of mixed race, their mother is French, we live in France and we want to keep living in France. We were afraid of the alternative.”

Kardia, a French citizen who was originally from Burkina Faso, said she was “very happy” with the result. “We need a young president who will change things. For me it’s an important win for our children. The fact he is so young does’t bother me at all. He is just what France needs. A young entrepreneur.”

She said that Le Pen’s place in the election’s second round had made her afraid. “I’ve been in France for 20 years, lived in the US, now I live in Spain. My children are studying, living and working all over the world. I don’t understand this idea of France for the French. We need to have a world view.”

After the president-elect left the stage, the party went on into the night. A long and troubling presidential election was over and it was time to celebrate.

ColinColin

French president accused of ‘monarchical’ drift after addressing both houses of parliament at former seat of French kings

The French president Emmanuel Macron has promised a “profound transformation” of France and Europe, calling for an end to defeatism and “cynicism” in a rare address to both houses of parliament in the gilded palace of Versailles.



In a ninety-minute speech intended to echo the style of the US state of the union address, Macron reiterated his key campaign proposals to change French labour laws and overhaul the workings of parliament, demanding lawmakers get on board and silence “the cynic that lies in all of us”.

Macron repeated his promise to slash the number of members of parliament by one third and hold a referendum on it if parliament did not approve. He promised to give citizens more power to use petitions to get key topics discussed in parliament and to add a “dose” of proportional representation to French parliament – without giving further detail.

He confirmed that France’s state of emergency, in place since the Paris terrorist attacks of November 2015, would be lifted this autumn. But after human rights lawyers had voiced concerns, he vowed new antiterror laws would include checks and balances by judges. In an attempt to reach out beyond his economically comfortable support base, Macron promised to end the persistent inequality in France that still left people “imprisoned” by their “social origins”.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest French President Macron addresses a special congress gathering both houses of parliament at Versailles Palace Photograph: Eric Feferberg/EPA

The pro-European centrist was at his most emotional on the need to reinvent the Europe Union after Brexit. He said Britain’s vote last year to leave the European Union was a “symptom” of a “failure... that we must have the courage to face head-on”.

He said: “We have never needed Europe more”, but insisted the European Union must be revived by a “new generation of leaders”.

“The last 10 years have been cruel for Europe,” he said. “We have managed crises but we have lost our way.” He added: “I believe firmly in Europe. But I don’t find the scepticism unjustified.”

He added: “The building of Europe has been weakened by the spread of bureaucracy and by the growing scepticism that comes from that.”

Macron said France and Germany would launch “democratic conventions” across Europe by the end of 2017 to discuss the future of the EU. The conventions would take the form of national debates on the EU and would be aimed at “refounding Europe”. Each member state would be “free to sign on or not, but there is no longer time for quick fixes”.

Macron had summoned members of parliament and senators to sit in a joint congress at the sumptuous palace at Versailles to listen to his speech – a gesture which has never before happened at the start of a French presidency and which confirmed his tendency to use regal and majestic symbols to stress what he has promised would be a “revolution” in France.

Some opposition MPs on the left boycotted the gathering in the regal setting, accusing him of a “monarchical” drift. The address in the former seat of French kings provoked anger among leftist parliament members and concerns over costs among some centrists.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest French President Macron addresses the special congress Photograph: Eric Feferberg/EPA

Jean-Luc Mélenchon, head of the leftist France Unbowed group, led his 17 MPs in a boycott, accusing “Macron the pharaoh” of crossing a line in his “monarchical” approach to the presidency, slamming the speech for its “bleating Europeanism” and “deathly dullness”.

Macron’s new party, La République En Marche, which defines itself as “neither left nor right”, won a solid parliamentary majority last month. This has been bolstered by members of some other parties saying they would support the government’s key proposals.

This gives Macron a free hand for his agenda to change labour protections. But the first sittings of parliament have seen heated rows among opposition MPs about the size of Macron’s majority and the president’s role.

Monday’s Versailles speech was seen as shaping Macron’s personalised approach to the presidency. He slammed the “immobilism” of previous eras in a dig at his socialist former mentor François Hollande and criticised the one-time “agitation” of the presidency in a dig at the former rightwing president Nicolas Sarkozy.

“Until now, we were too often on the wrong track,” said the 39-year-old who won the presidency on a promise of political renewal amid the collapse of France’s traditional parties of government. He warned that in the past France “preferred procedures to results, rules to initiative, a society where you live off inherited wealth, to a fair society”.

It is the second time that Macron has appeared amid the pomp of Versailles since his election – the first was to host the Russian leader Vladimir Putin in May.

Exclusive: Macron pledges pragmatism and cooperation with post-Brexit Britain Read more

In 2008, Sarkozy made constitutional changes to allow a French president to directly address both houses of parliament at Versailles. Prior to that, direct discussion with lawmakers was the preserve of the prime minister. A president could only address both houses through a written message read out by the prime minister.

The timing of Macron’s speech is crucial – his address comes the day before the prime minister, Édouard Philippe, gives his opening speech to parliament setting out the details of the proposed structural reforms, including the changes to loosen the French labour code to ease rules on businesses.



ColinColin

Moody’s forecasts prolonged period of uncertainty as Arab nations prepare to meet in Cairo over Qatar’s response to demands

Ratings agency Moody’s has downgraded Qatar’s economic outlook as political uncertainty swirled ahead of a crunch meeting between Arab nations on Wednesday in Cairo.



A quartet of Arab nations said early on Wednesday it had received Qatar’s response to its demands for ending a diplomatic crisis gripping the Persian Gulf. Bahrain, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates said only that they would respond “in a timely manner”.

Gulf states prepare to ramp up economic sanctions against Qatar Read more

Ratings agency Moody’s changed Qatar’s outlook to negative, saying this was largely due to the ongoing diplomatic dispute engulfing the tiny, energy-rich nation. Early on Wednesday it said “the likelihood of a prolonged period of uncertainty extending into 2018 has increased and a quick resolution of the dispute is unlikely over the next few months”. The turmoil “carries the risk that Qatar’s sovereign credit fundamentals could be negatively affected”, it added.

So far, Qatar’s exports of natural gas have yet to be affected, the agency said. Those exports make the small country’s citizens have the biggest per capita incomes in the world.

The quartet cut ties to the FIFA 2022 World Cup host early last month over its alleged support for extremist groups and ties with Iran. Qatar denies supporting extremists and has defended its warm relations with Iran; the two countries share a massive undersea natural gas field.



The nations issued a 13-point list of demands on 22 June, giving Qatar 10 days to comply. They later extended the deadline by another 48 hours at the request of Kuwait, which has acted as a mediator to resolve the crisis. That deadline expired early Wednesday.

Later on Wednesday, foreign ministers from the four Arab countries will meet in Cairo to discuss their next move. Late Tuesday, Egypt’s state-run Mena news agency reported intelligence agency chiefs from those countries had met in Cairo, likely discussing the crisis.

Al-Jazeera journalists: 'This isn't the first time we've come under threat' Read more

What Qatar said in response to the demands remains unclear. It already had called the demands, which include shutting down its al-Jazeera satellite news network, expelling Turkish military forces based in the country and paying restitution, as an affront to its sovereignty.

The crisis has become a global concern because neither side appears to be backing down. Qatar, the world’s biggest exporter of liquefied natural gas, hosts some 10,000 American troops at its sprawling al-Udeid air base. US secretary of state Rex Tillerson has been trying to ease tensions, while President Donald Trump’s comments on Qatar funding extremist groups back the Saudi-led countries’ position.

The nations could impose financial sanctions or force Qatar out of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), a regional body known as the GCC that serves as a counterbalance to Iran.

Some Arab media outlets have suggested a military confrontation or a change of leadership in Qatar could be in the offing, but officials have said those options are not on the table.

On Tuesday, German foreign minister, Sigmar Gabriel, visited officials in both the United Arab Emirates and Qatar. He said Germany supported the UAE’s efforts at confronting those who funded extremists.

“We now have this opportunity to reach good results for the benefit of the whole region. The matter is not related only to the sovereignty of Qatar,” Gabriel said. “We have to come back to common work at the GCC and for the Europeans this is a very important matter. For us, the GCC is the guarantor of stability and security in the region.”

Emirati foreign minister Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan kept up the pressure on Qatar in his own remarks to journalists. “To defeat terrorism, we must confront extremism, we must confront hate speech, we must confront the harbouring and sheltering of extremists and terrorists, and funding them,” he said. “Unfortunately, we in this region see that our sister nation of Qatar has allowed and harboured and encouraged all of this.”

“Enough is enough,” he added.

Qatar’s foreign minister meanwhile criticised the four Arab nations for trying to isolate Qatar “under the banner of fighting terrorism”.

“When measures are clothed in this context, it is because they think they will be met with international sympathy because they are ‘anti-terrorism’ measures,” Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al Thani said.

Though Qatar Airways’ routes over its neighbours have been cut, along with the country’s sole land border with Saudi Arabia, the country has been able to source food from other countries. Its economy, fuelled by its natural gas exports, continues to hum along though there has been pressure on its stock market and currency.

ColinColin

Health of pair who have stopped eating after losing jobs in post-coup crackdown said to be deteriorating rapidly in custody

The health of two hunger strikers held in Turkish government custody who have not eaten for 118 days is rapidly deteriorating, according to their lawyers, who have urged the authorities to respond to their demands before the damage to their bodies becomes irreversible.

Nuriye Gülmen and Semih Özakça, two teachers who were dismissed from their jobs in a broad government crackdown after a coup attempt last year, launched the hunger strike nearly four months ago and were taken into custody in May because of fears their protest could escalate into broader street demonstrations.

“They can still become healthy, but time is running out,” said Behiç Aşçı, one of their lawyers. “The government should take action immediately. This is not the end, but the end is near.”

Gülmen and Özakça’s case has become a symbol of the suffering of tens of thousands of Turks dismissed or detained in the government’s attempt to root out followers of Fethullah Gülen from the civil service, media and academia. The government accuses the exiled preacher’s movement of orchestrating last year’s coup.

The purge has gone far beyond the alleged perpetrators to encompass various dissident groups and even lawmakers in the opposition.

The hunger strike has refocused attention on heavy-handed police tactics and the government’s attempts to quash dissent. Gülmen and Özakça’s arrest occurred on the day they were scheduled to be interviewed by the Guardian, and their lawyers have said the reason they were detained is to prevent their protest from spiralling into a “Gezi-style” protest movement, a reference to the large demonstrations against the government in Istanbul’s Taksim Square in 2013.



One-armed Turkish protester denounces investigation against him Read more

“Some people think if Nuriye and Semih are let go they will stop the strike, but what they demand is not only their freedom, but their jobs, and justice,” said Aşçı. “Until they get this, they will not stop their strike.”

He added: “They can still stop the strike if they get their jobs back and survive and become healthy people. Their situation is not irreversible.”

Before they were detained, the two hunger strikers were surviving on a diet of lemon, saltwater and sugar solutions, but lawyers say their health has suffered since, with the government failing to provide them with necessary equipment to ease their condition. They said Gülmen was suffering from muscle atrophy and could barely drink water, and Özakça’s eyesight was deteriorating. Both were beginning to exhibit heart irregularities.

Senior political figures in the opposition have urged the pair to end their hunger strike to save their lives, but they have persisted.

“The only thing they know is how to try to make us bow down with their guns,” said Veli Saçılık, a well-known activist who also launched a protest in the capital, Ankara, demanding his job back after he was dismissed last year. “The government is ruling the country arbitrarily.”

Saçılık, who lost his arm during a crackdown on hunger strikers in prison in 2000, is under investigation by the government. On Monday, his shoulder was broken in an altercation with police during a protest.

ColinColin

An animal rights group is calling for an end to New Zealand’s “barbaric” war on possums after joeys were drowned in a bucket of water at a school fundraiser.



It said children were becoming desensitised to violence as a result of the method of killing an animal that is considered a pest in New Zealand. “It was clearly inhumane, it was appalling that children were witnessing this violence,” said Jasmijn de Boo, chief executive of animal rights group Safe.

The killings took place during a North Island school’s annual possum hunt. The possum mothers had been shot and their fur and skins sold. It is illegal to wilfully or recklessly harm any wild animals – including possums – and every measure must be taken to euthanise possums as humanely as possible, with shooting being the preferred method.

De Boo said the recent drownings were not a one-off and that many more New Zealanders were supportive rather than shocked. “We’re concerned this will spill over to New Zealand children becoming more desensitised to other sentient beings, as there is good evidence that people who hurt animals are more likely to perpetrate domestic violence or violence against humans so we need to really take this issue seriously.”

A petition has been launched to ban school possum hunts which has garnered close to 9,000 signatures and will be delivered to the education minister, Nikki Kaye, when it reaches 10,000.



Possum hunting is a widespread and popular practice across both the North and the South islands, with both amateurs and professionals alike.

Do Boo accepted it was a difficult situation given the government pledged to wipe out the species (along with stoats, ferrets and rats) by 2050. “The conservation of birds is very important, and possums play a role in that but they have been demonised as pests for a long time,” de Boo said.

“The word ‘pests’ is problematic because it insinuates they are worthless objects that can be treated without care – run over, beaten, whatever. We need to get back to the idea that all animals are sentient beings and they do not deserve a cruel death – even possums.” Safe has suggested exploring more humane alternatives, such as mass sterilisation.

The Royal New Zealand Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA) told the school the way it killed the joeys wasn’t humane, local media reported, and the school pledged to work with the SPCA in the future “to ensure that all animal welfare requirements are met”.

Australian brushtail possums were introduced to New Zealand in 1837 by settlers who hoped to establish a roaring trade in possum fur. However the animals quickly got out of control because they faced no natural predators in New Zealand.

They had a devastating impact on bird life, competing for food and habitat resources, and climbing into nests to eat eggs and fledglings. They also destroyed native trees with their strong paws, especially rata, totara, titoki, kowhai and kohekohe.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest A sign warning of the use of poison along the Milford Track in New Zealand. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian

The president of Federated Farmers, Katie Milne, said the recent outcry was symptomatic of a growing cultural divide between rural and urban Kiwis, and it was “essential” to routinely cull possums to protect wildlife and stop the spread of bovine tuberculosis to farm animals.

Milne said the government culling of possums using trapping and poisoning methods had been “very effective” in recent years, and the native trees in her region on the west coast of the south island were beginning to return.

Poisoning possums is a controversial method in New Zealand because many of the most commonly used poisons – including 1080 – can take hours or even days to kill. “As a farmer I am used to being faced with life and death, and possum eradication is an essential part of farming life here and protecting the native New Zealand bush and birds,” Milne said. “But certainly the way those joeys were killed was not ideal and it could have been done in a better way. For farmers shooting is the best method.”

According to the New Zealand Fur Council possums consume 21,000 tons of New Zealand vegetation every day. About 1,500 people are employed in the possum fur and skin business, with the industry generating sales worth between $100m and $150m a year, and killing about 2m possums annually.

There have also been a number of forays into selling “possum pies” on the west coast of the south island, and possum meat is also used in pet food such as “possyyum”.

West coaster Chris Long, 25, started hunting possums when he was 12, and has paid for “one-and-a-half-trips around the the world” with his possum earnings, which on a good day can be up to NZ$700 ($510), or about 50 possums.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Chris Long with a backpack loaded with 40kg of possum fur and skin after a hunt. Photograph: Chris Long

“I come from a place where hunting and fishing is normal, but I do feel sorry for the animals and I don’t enjoy killing them,” said Long, who says 5-10% of the trees within a 10km radius of his house have died from possum destruction, which has contributed to landslips in hilly areas.

“In Australia I’ve played with the possums and fed them and it is great fun. They are pretty cool animals. But in this country they are not quite so popular and they are a good form of income for me.”

ColinColin

Divisions have emerged within Catalonia’s pro-sovereignty movement after a minister in the regional government was sacked for suggesting that this autumn’s independence referendum would probably not go ahead because of fierce opposition from the Spanish government.

A binding vote on 1 October was announced last month by the Catalan president, Carles Puigdemont, with voters to be asked: “Do you want Catalonia to be an independent country in the form of a republic?”

The conservative government of Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, has vowed to use all the means at its disposal to stop the referendum from taking place, arguing that it would be a clear violation of the country’s constitution.

“To all Catalans, to all Spaniards, I want to tell you to maintain confidence in the future as authoritarian delusions ... will never defeat the serenity and harmony of our democratic state,” he said on Wednesday.

Splits in the movement emerged when Jordi Baiget, the minister for business and knowledge, was sacked by Puigdemont on Monday after deviating from the government line by telling an interviewer: “The [Spanish] state is so strong that we probably won’t be able to hold the referendum.”

The move was condemned by senior members of the Catalan independence movement – including some of those who have been punished by the courts for their part in the symbolic independence referendum held three years ago.

The former Catalan vice-president Joana Ortega, who was banned from holding public office for 21 months for helping to facilitate the vote on 9 November 2014, tweeted: “Those of us who put our necks on the line wanted everyone to be able to have a say. Including @jordibaiget … ”

Francesc Homs, a former spokesman for the Catalan government who was barred from office for 13 months over the same referendum also criticised the move, tweeting: “Decisions such as this don’t contribute to the project or make it better – just the opposite.”

Catalan government sources described Baiget as a valued member of the administration but said the government was absolutely committed to holding the referendum and respecting the result regardless of which side won.

“The president wants to have the utmost confidence in all the members of his government,” said one. “When there’s a loss of confidence, there are decisions that have to be made … To be part of this government, you have to agree with what this government’s doing. If not, there’s no point.”

The unrest comes as the regional government sketched out its legal plans for the referendum. On Tuesday it announced that Catalonia’s independence would be declared immediately in the event of a victory for the yes campaign.

Spain’s deputy prime minister flatly dismissed suggestions that Catalonia could declare independence within 48 hours of the referendum result.

“The [Catalan] government can spend 30 days explaining the referendum law or judicial transience and it can say that it can declare independence in 48 hours,” said Soraya Sáenz de Santamaría on Tuesday. “But one thing is clear: the [Spanish] state has shown that 24 hours is enough to appeal against these law sand get them suspended.”

In an interview with the Guardian, Carme Forcadell, the speaker of the Catalan parliament, stressed that the October vote would be legally binding.

“If the result is yes, there will be negotiations with the Spanish state, as would be normal, about the separation of the powers,” she said.

“The negotiations will be about the separation. This is not the time to negotiate more powers. That may have been the case in the past, but that moment has passed. The intention is to implement the result.”



She added: “If there was a no vote, it would be respected and there would have to be fresh elections in Catalonia and the result will depend on the state of society at the time.”

Forcadell also insisted that Catalonia would gain international recognition as a state and would not be left in the diplomatic wilderness as some countries – such as Somaliland – have been after secessions.

“It’s always said there will be no recognition, but there have been secessions such as Slovenia that ended up inside the European Union,” she said.

“If a majority express their will democratically, it cannot just be ignored … In the past the EU has adapted to positions. There is no legal precedent that suggests the EU should ban Catalonia from being a member.”

Forcadell predicted the EU would not want to disbar Catalonia from the single market, pointing out most Spanish goods reach Europe through Catalonia: “Pragmatism will win. Spain will know it has to negotiate. This is a political conflict, and Spain is trying to solve the problem through the courts.”

Although Puigdemont, Forcadell and others insist the wealthy north-eastern region has a political, economic and cultural right to self-determination, the response from Madrid has been unequivocal.



A survey last weekend for the Barcelona-based newspaper La Vanguardia showed that 42.5% of those polled favoured independence to 37.6 who opposed it.



But hidden in the numbers is a good deal of scepticism. Only 54% said they would vote in the unilateral referendum and just 12% think it will eventually lead to separation. However, a large majority, 62%, believe the Spanish government should allow the referendum in the same way that the UK government allowed the Scottish independence vote in 2014.

More than 80% of participants opted for independence in the symbolic poll three years ago, although only 2.3 million of Catalonia’s 5.4 million eligible voters took part.







ColinColin

Spanish government has vowed to do everything it can to prevent long-awaited and highly controversial referendum from taking place

Catalonia’s long-awaited and bitterly controversial referendum on independence from Spain will be finally held on 1 October, the regional government announced on Friday, triggering yet another political and judicial showdown with Madrid.

The Catalan president, Carles Puigdemont, said that voters in the unilateral referendum would be asked the question: “Do you want Catalonia to be an independent country in the form of a republic?”

Puigdemont’s pro-sovereignty administration insists the wealthy north-eastern region has a political, economic and cultural right to self-determination.



But the Spanish government is implacably opposed to secession, arguing that it is a violation of the constitution, and has vowed to use all possible means to stop the referendum from being held.

Puigdemont said that Madrid had left his government with no choice but to call the vote.

“When they’ve asked us what we Catalans want, we’ve given them proposals - all kinds of proposals,” he said. “But they have all - without exception - been rejected or seriously cut back.”

Spain’s deputy prime minister, Soraya Sáenz de Santamaría, dismissed the announcement as an empty threat, saying: “They can announce a referendum as many times as they want and put it back as many weeks as they want, and hold as many events as they want, but the referendum is not going to take place.”

More than 80% of participants opted for independence in a symbolic poll held three years ago – although only 2.3 million of Catalonia’s 5.4 million eligible voters took part.



This time round, however, the Catalan government insists the results will be legally binding.

In a speech in Madrid last month, Puigdemont said his government had a “democratically inviolable” commitment to the referendum and accused Spain’s prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, of failing to do anything “serious, sincere or real” to resolve the issue.

Spain’s constitutional court ruled the previous referendum was illegal five days before it was held on 9 November 2014, but the then Catalan president, Artur Mas, and others pushed ahead with the vote, helped by more than 40,000 volunteers who opened schools and installed polling stations.

In March this year, Mas was found guilty of disobeying the constitutional court’s ruling and banned from holding public office for two years.

Puigdemont has said that he is prepared to face the consequences of defying the court.

“This is a deeply serious business, and profoundly democratic,” he told the Guardian last year. “I could not disobey the will of the Catalan parliament.”

The Spanish government, however, is confident that it can stop the referendum from happening in the first place. As well as the courts, it has the power to invoke article 155 of the constitution, which would allow it to take drastic steps to thwart the vote by suspending regional autonomy.

Such a move could see Madrid ordering the closure of schools in the region to stop them being used as polling stations and even taking control of the Catalan police.

Last week the Venice Commission – a panel of experts who advise the Council of Europe on constitutional law – wrote to Puigdemont, telling him that the referendum would have to be carried out “in agreement with the Spanish authorities … and in full compliance with the constitution and the applicable legislation”.

Although the separatist movement has acquired huge momentum over recent years, any vote is likely to be very close.

According to a poll at the end of March, 48.5% of Catalans oppose seceding from Spain, while 44.3% support breaking away.

The opposition camp appears to be growing: another poll, from December last year, revealed that 46.8% of Catalans were against independence, compared with 45.3% in favour.

On Sunday, the former Barcelona football club coach Pep Guardiola will read out a manifesto in favour of a referendum at a rally in the city.

He told Radio Catalunya that the region needed the opportunity to decide its own future, adding: “We’re just asking that people be allowed to vote for a better life.”

ColinColin

Cáceres, who was awarded the Goldman Environmental Prize for her opposition to one of Central America’s biggest hydropower projects, was shot at home

Berta Cáceres, the Honduran indigenous and environmental rights campaigner, has been murdered, barely a week after she was threatened for opposing a hydroelectric project.



Her death prompted international outrage at the murderous treatment of campaigners in Honduras, as well as a flood of tributes to a prominent and courageous defender of the natural world.

Murder of activist Berta Cáceres sparks violent clashes in Honduras Read more

The co-founder of the Council of Indigenous Peoples of Honduras (Copinh) was shot dead by gunmen who entered her home in La Esperanza at around 1am on Thursday. Some reports say there were two killers; others suggest 11. They escaped without being identified, after also wounding the Mexican activist Gustavo Castro Soto.

Police told local media the killings occurred during an attempted robbery, but the family said they had no doubt it was an assassination prompted by Cáceres’s high-profile campaigns against dams, illegal loggers and plantation owners.

“I have no doubt that she has been killed because of her struggle and that soldiers and people from the dam are responsible, I am sure of that. I hold the government responsible,” her 84-year-old mother said on radio Globo at 6.

Karen Spring, a friend of Cáceres’, said it was unclear how many assailants had participated in the attack, but that Cáceres was hit by at least four bullets.

Members of Copinh escorted the body as it left the house on the way to the morgue in the provincial capital. About a hundred of them also marched from the public prosecutor’s office to the police station, where they demanded an independent international investigation. Others headed to La Esperanza to take part in the wake.

“People here are still in shock that Berta is dead,” Spring told the Guardian. “But they are very clear that they will continue their struggle to honour Berta.”

Last year, Cáceres – who is a member of the Lenca indigenous group, the largest in Honduras – was awarded the Goldman Environmental Prize for her opposition to one of Central America’s biggest hydropower projects, a cascade of four dams in the Gualcarque river basin, including the Agua Zarca dam.



The campaign has held up the project, which is being built by local firm DESA with the backing of international engineering and finance companies, and prompted the withdrawal of China’s Sinohydro and the World Bank’s private sector arm, the International Finance Corporation.

Cáceres had called for other foreign partners, including the Dutch Development Bank, the Finnish Fund for Industrial Cooperation and German companies Siemens and Voith, to pull out.

She has also won plaudits from international NGOs for standing up to powerful landowners, a US-funded police force, and a mercenary army of private security guards in the most murderous country in the world for environmental campaigners.



In an interview with the Guardian at the time of her award, Cáceres was realistic about the risks she faced, but said she felt obliged to fight on and urged others to do so.

“We must undertake the struggle in all parts of the world, wherever we may be, because we have no other spare or replacement planet. We have only this one, and we have to take action,” she said.

The dangers appear to have increased in recent weeks. After a Copinh march in Río Blanco on 20 February, she and other participants were confronted by the army, police, local mayor and employees of the dam company. Several were detained and some threatened, the council said in a statement.

Remembering Berta Cáceres: 'I'm a human rights fighter and I won't give up' Read more

It was not the first time. Cáceres previously said she had received warnings that she would be raped or murdered if she continued her campaigns. There have also been past reports that hitmen were hired to assassinate her.

Honduras is a perilous place for activism. Cáceres’s fellow Copinh leader Tomás García was shot dead by a military officer in a protest in 2013. Several others have been killed this year, according to the council. Cáceres had recently moved home because she felt the new house in La Esperanza would be safer.

Between 2010 and 2014, 101 campaigners were killed in Honduras, a higher death toll relative to population than anywhere else, according to the study How Many More? by NGO Global Witness. It said a disproportionately high number of them were from indigenous communities who resisted development projects or the encroachment of farms on their territory.

The United Nations special rapporteur for indigenous rights, Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, who met Cáceres last November, said she was “saddened and horrified” by the news.

“This shows the high level of impunity in Honduras. Beyond the high homicide levels in society, there is a clear tendency for indigenous campaigners and human rights activists to be killed,” said Tauli-Corpuz, whose report on the country will come out in a few months.

She noted the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights had raised concerns about Cáceres’s safety with the Honduran president, Juan Orlando Hernández, last year and formally called on the government to apply “precautionary measures”.

“This meant the government had to protect her,” Tauli-Corpuz said. “Yet she was assassinated just like that. If someone like her suffers in this way, then what chance is there for others who campaign for the environment and human rights?”

Jorge Alcerro, chief of staff for the Honduran president, Juan Orlando Hernández, said that security forces would “use all means to find the killers”, but he did not explain why she had no police protection at the time of her murder.

Billy Kyte, a campaigner at Global Witness, paid tribute to Cáceres for her “incredible courage” and said the government – which is behind many of the controversial projects – must reverse the alarmingly murderous trend in Honduras.



“The shocking news of Berta’s killing is a dramatic wake-up call for the Honduran state. Indigenous people are being killed in alarming numbers just for defending their rights. The Honduran state must act immediately to hold the killers to account and protect Berta’s family and colleagues,” he said.

David Gordon, executive director of the Goldman Prize, echoed these comments: “Berta’s bravery in the face of overwhelming repression will be a rallying call for environmental activism in Honduras,” he said in a statement.

Naomi Klein, the Canadian author and environmental campaigner, tweeted: “Devastating news. Berta was a critical leader and fierce land defender. Part of a global wave of such attacks.”

• This article was amended on 7 March 2016. An earlier version said Berta Cáceres’s brother had been wounded in the attack. The wounded man was not her brother but the Mexican activist Gustavo Castro Soto. It was further amended on 11 March 2016 to clarify that Agua Zarca is not “a cascade of four giant dams” but one of four dams planned in the Gualcarque river basin.

ColinColin

All-girl team of robotics students must watch machine compete at international contest in Washington via video link after entry permits refused

Two Afghan girls refused visas to the United States for a robot-building competition have said they were mystified as the contest’s organisers said teams from Iran and Sudan as well as a de facto Syrian team had gained visas.



The unusual story of the Afghan all-girl team of robotics students emerged as the United States grapples with the legality of President Donald Trump’s order to temporarily ban travel from six Muslim-majority countries.

'I have the right to be here': becoming an American under a Trump presidency Read more

Afghanistan itself is not on the list and Team Afghanistan’s robot, unlike its creators, has been allowed entry to the United States. Asked by Reuters on Tuesday why the girls were banned, a US State Department spokesperson cited regulations prohibiting the agency from discussing individual visa cases.

So the six team members will watch the ball-sorting machine compete in Washington DC via video link during the 16-18 July event from their hometown of Herat, in western Afghanistan, according to the First Global contest organisers.

“We still don’t know the reason why we were not granted visas, because other countries participating in the competition have been given visas,” said 14-year-old Fatemah Qaderyan, part of the team that made two journeys to the US embassy in the Afghan capital, Kabul, to apply for their papers.

“No one knows about the future but … we did our best and we hope that our robot could get a position along other robots from other countries,” Qaderyan said.

Most of the female team members were either infants or not yet born at the time of the US-backed military intervention in Afghanistan in 2001 that toppled the Taliban regime whose ultra-hardline interpretation of Islamic sharia law banned girls from school, women from working outside the home and all females from leaving home without a male relative.

More than 15 years later around 10,000 US and allied international troops remain in Afghanistan to support an elected government in Kabul that constitutionally guarantees women’s rights but is increasingly losing ground to a Taliban insurgency that now controls or contests some 40% of territory.

Qaderyan’s teammate from Herat, 17-year-old Lida Azizi, was less forgiving of the US visa decision. “All of the countries can participate in the competitions, but we can’t. So it’s a clear insult for the people of Afghanistan,” Azizi said.



First Global’s president, Joe Sestak, said in a post on its Facebook page that he was “saddened” by the US decision but the Afghan team would be able to connect with the competition via a live Skype video link.

“That is how we must now honour our fellow teammates, those brave girls from Afghanistan,” he said.

He added that the teams of 156 countries – including from Iran and Sudan, which are on Trump’s list of countries whose citizens are banned from entry – had received their visas.

“The support of the US State Department (including its embassies) has been simply nothing short of amazing,” Sestak said in the post, adding that one other team, from Gambia, had been also denied visas.

Also approved for visas was “Team Hope”, a group of Syrian refugees, he said.

Syria is among the Muslim-majority countries named in Trump’s executive order prohibiting all citizens from entry for 90 days. The other countries, apart from Iran, Syria and Sudan, are Libya, Somalia and Yemen.

In a 26 June ruling the US supreme court revived parts of Trump’s 6 March executive order that had been blocked by lower courts. The highest court let the ban go forward with a limited scope, saying that it cannot apply to anyone with a credible and “bona fide relationship” with a US person or entity.

ColinColin

The French prime minister has vowed to make a raft of public-spending cuts to stem France’s “intolerable” reliance on state borrowing, which he said had left the country dancing on a debt “volcano”.

In his opening speech to parliament on Tuesday, Edouard Philippe side-stepped the notion of one-size-fits-all austerity, instead insisting that the plan of the new centrist president, Emmanuel Macron, was to reduce public spending while launching a €50bn (£44bn) investment programme and cutting a range of taxes, including slashing corporate taxes to boost businesses.

Philippe’s speech revealed a delicate balancing act between what he called unavoidable public spending cuts coupled with state infrastructure investment and tax cuts that he promised would raise people’s spending power.

He warned that French public spending and debt had reached unsustainable levels. “We are dancing on a volcano that is rumbling ever louder,” Philippe said. “The French are hooked on public spending. Like all addictions, it doesn’t solve any of the problems it is meant to ease. And like all addictions, it takes will and courage to detox.”

Cutting France’s budget deficit is key to winning the trust of its European Union partner, Germany, and persuading Berlin to embark on reforms of the bloc. France has one of Europe’s highest levels of public spending.

Philippe said public debt totalled €2.1trillion, nearly the equivalent of a year’s economic output, which left the country vulnerable to speculation. He said the government aimed to bring France’s deficit within the EU limit of 3% of GDP this year.

Exact details of where public spending cuts would happen were not spelt out. Philippe, who was on the French right before he was appointed by Macron, said the public sector wage bill would be reduced, meaning cuts to the number of state workers. He also spoke of scrapping tax loopholes and reviewing housing spending.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Emmanuel Macron is winched onto the French submarine Le Terrible. Photograph: Twitter

But, crucially, Philippe promised taxpayers would not bear the brunt. “France cannot remain the champion both of public spending and taxes,” he said.

“Businesses must want to set up and develop on our territory rather than elsewhere,” he added, announcing that corporate tax would be cut from 33% to 25% in the next five years.

Philippe reiterated Macron’s campaign promises, including the loosening of labour laws to “free up” business. But the timescale for some flagship tax cuts – such as reducing housing tax – could be pushed back, coming into effect between now and 2022.



The rightwing opposition party, Les Républicains, which during the election campaign had argued that France had not balanced a budget for 40 years, said the proposed spending cuts did not go far enough and there was insufficient detail on how to finance the new spending.

The leftist Jean-Luc Mélenchon denounced what he called a free-market dismantling of the state.

Philippe reached out to voters confirming Macron’s promises to make dental and eye care free on the health system, overhaul the school-leaving exam, the baccalauréat, and introduce a new national service for young people.

Other measures included compulsory vaccinations for young children and progressively raising the price of a packet of cigarettes from €7 to €10.

Last week, France’s independent auditor revealed an €8bn funding shortfall in this year’s budget, saying the deficit would once again be above the EU’s limit of 3% of national income.

Philippe had immediately seized on this to blame overspending on the previous administration under the Socialist François Hollande, for whom Macron had worked as an economic adviser then economy minister until last year.

It is a tradition in French politics for each new administration to blame the previous one for overspending, but Hollande, who inherited a much higher funding black hole from the rightwing Nicolas Sarkozy, had failed to blame Sarkozy loudly enough and paid the price when he then tightened the belt on public spending and his popularity plummeted and support collapsed.

Philippe and Macron have sought to distance themselves from the Hollande era.

Philippe’s speech came as Macron took part in a missile launch simulation aboard the French nuclear submarine Le Terrible in the Atlantic. France will be the only EU country with nuclear weapons after Britain’s departure. According to the French constitution, it is the president who decides whether to fire nuclear missiles.

ColinColin

France’s centrist president, Emmanuel Macron, has appointed a prime minister from the right to lead his bid for a parliamentary majority in June’s elections and push through his plans to loosen strict labour laws.

Édouard Philippe, 46, the mayor of the Normandy port town Le Havre, comes from Les Républicains, the party that was headed by Nicolas Sarkozy until last year and whose candidate, François Fillon, was knocked out in the first round of the presidential election.

Philippe supported Alain Juppé, the moderate, centre-right former prime minister, in the party’s presidential primary race last year.

Emmanuel Macron races to train would-be MPs Read more

His appointment is seen as a strategic move by the French president to destabilise the already divided French right and win over rightwing politicians to his La République en Marche (La REM) movement.

Macron, who served as economy minister under the Socialist former president François Hollande, has attracted dozens of centre-left MPs to his new movement and needed to reach out to the right. The move was also calculated to lure parliamentary hopefuls from Les Républicains as a way of securing the majority he needs to enact his manifesto promises to provide more flexibility for business.

Taking office at the grandiose prime minister’s residence of Le Hôtel Matignon, Philippe stated pointedly: “I am a man of the right”, but added that he respected politicians on the left and was driven by “the greater good”.

His appointment is a blow to Les Républicains, who have been trying to regroup after the presidential vote and prevent defections to Macron’s camp.

Party officials insisted Philippe’s move was strictly a personal decision, but about 20 MPs broke ranks and issued a statement urging Les Républicains and centre-right allies to accept Macron’s “outstretched hand”, saying the right needed to “take the full measure of the political transformation taking place before their eyes”.

Philippe was born in Rouen in Normandy and based his political career in Le Havre, where his grandfather was a docker. The son of two teachers, he speaks German and spent part of his childhood in Bonn when his father was the headteacher of the French lycée. He comes from the same university background as Macron: he studied at Paris’s prestigious, political science institute, Sciences Po, then attended the exclusive École Nationale d’Administration, the civil service graduate school seen as a factory of the French elite.

As a student, Philippe was briefly a social democrat activist within the French Socialist party before moving to the right. He has never held a government post and is relatively little-known outside his fiefdom in the north, which helps Macron present him as a new face as part of his promise to renew politics.

Philippe has veered between politics and the private sector including working for an American law firm and holding a senior position at the French nuclear company Areva.

The French left and the Greens reacted to the appointment by saying he was too rightwing and not focused enough on green issues, citing his time working in the nuclear industry. The government lineup, which will be announced on Tuesday, will show exactly what importance Macron intends to place on environmental issues.

Philippe has co-authored two novels set in the political sphere. One, published 10 years ago, described the French prime minister’s office and residence of Matignon as “a type of hell: golden, sought after by many and satisfying for the ego, but hell nonetheless”. He described a prime minister quickly “submerged” and drowning under “a mass of information”.



Although he has been a longstanding advocate of what Macron has defined as a new form of pragmatic “neither left nor right politics”, Philippe was sometimes critical during the campaign in columns written for the leftwing daily Libération. He said Macron had impressed with his “power of seduction and reformist rhetoric” but that it was wrong to compare him to John F Kennedy who “had more charisma”.

As a member of parliament for Normandy, Philippe abstained during the vote to legalise same-sex marriage in France in 2013, and the feminist group Osez Le Féminisme has complained that he abstained in 2014 on a vote for a sweeping gender equality law.

Macron is now under pressure to ensure that he fulfils his promise to appoint more women to senior positions in the new government. Macron said half of the ministers would be women but his key cabinet and senior advisor positions in the Elysée, announced on Sunday, were all men.

ColinColin

Soft loans, subsidies and World Bank funding mean nations are ‘talking out of both sides of their mouths’ on climate, says report

The G20 nations provide four times more public financing to fossil fuels than to renewable energy, a report has revealed ahead of their summit in Hamburg, where Angela Merkel has said climate change will be at the heart of the agenda.

The authors of the report accuse the G20 of “talking out of both sides of their mouths” and the summit faces the challenge of a sceptical US administration after Donald Trump pulled out of the global Paris agreement.

The public finance comes in the form of soft loans and guarantees from governments, and, along with huge fossil fuel subsidies, makes coal, oil and gas plants cheaper and locks in carbon emissions for decades to come. But scientists calculate that to keep global warming below 2C, most fossil fuel reserves must be kept in the ground, requiring a major shift of investment to clean energy.

The new report by a coalition of NGOs found that the G20 countries provided $71.8bn of public finance for fossil-fuel projects between 2013-2015, compared with just $18.7bn for renewable energy. Japan provided the most at $16.5bn, which was six times more than it allotted for renewables.

China, which is curbing its coal use and increasingly being seen as a climate leader, provided $13.5bn for fossil fuels but just $85m for green energy. Germany, also seen a climate leader, provided $3.5bn of public finance for fossil fuels, compared with $2.4bn for renewables.

Merkel to put climate change at centre of G20 talks after Trump's Paris pullout Read more

Britain provided $972m for fossil fuels, compared with $172m for renewable energy.

“When the G20 countries committed to the Paris agreement, they made a pact with the world that they would take meaningful steps to reduce their carbon emissions in an effort to avert the worst effects of the climate crisis,” said Nicole Ghio of the Sierra Club, one of the groups that compiled the report. “But as we now know, these countries have been talking out of both sides of their mouths. It’s unconscionable that any nation would continue to waste public funds on fossil fuels when clean energy sources are readily available [and] more cost-effective and healthier for families and communities across the globe.”

“G20 leaders may like to talk about climate, but it’s clear their talk is cheap,” said Kate DeAngelis at Friends of the Earth US, another group behind the report. “While praising each other for investing in renewable energy at home, they bankroll billions of dollars for dirty fossil fuel projects in developing countries.

Ahead of the G20 summit in Hamburg on 7 and 8 July, Merkel made clear that action on climate change was high on the agenda. “Since the decision of the US to quit the Paris climate agreement, we are more determined than ever to make it successful,” she said. “We must tackle this existential challenge, and we cannot wait until every last person on earth has been convinced of the scientific proof.”

However, both the G20 and G7 groups have found it difficult to turn previous pledges on fossil fuel subsidies – which run at $10m a minute, according to the IMF – into action. In 2009, the G20 said it would phase out fossil fuel subsidies, noting that doing so by “by 2020 would reduce global greenhouse gas emissions in 2050 by 10%”.

Fossil fuels subsidised by $10m a minute, says IMF Read more

But by 2016, the G20 had still failed to set a target date for the phase-out, despite the urging of the world’s 49 countries most vulnerable to climate change and of global investors controlling $2.8tn in funds. The G7 set 2025 as the date to end fossil fuel subsidies in 2016 but this was dropped in 2017, after the Trump’s US administration would not join other G7 leaders in support of climate action.

The new analysis found two G20 countries – Russia and Argentina – provided zero public financing for green energy, but more than $1bn each for fossil fuels.

The report was produced by Oil Change International, Friends of the Earth US, the Sierra Club and WWF Europe. It included energy funding from multilateral development banks, such as the World Bank, in which the G20 have significant voting shares and this accounted for a quarter of the total. The renewable category did not include nuclear energy or large hydro dams, but even with these included fossil fuel financing was still far bigger.

ColinColin

Rights group urges Beijing to ‘end cruel farce’ and allow Nobel peace prize winner to travel abroad for cancer treatment

Time is running out for China’s most famous political prisoner, Liu Xiaobo, Amnesty International has said, accusing Beijing of showing “new depths of cruelty” with its treatment of the terminally ill democracy campaigner.

Liu, who is 61 and has been behind bars since 2009, was recently diagnosed with late stage liver cancer while serving an 11-year term for subversion.

On Wednesday campaigners repeated calls for Beijing to allow the Nobel peace prize winner to leave the country – a move it has resisted.

“Time is running out for Liu Xiaobo. It is not too late for the authorities to end this cruel farce. They must let Liu Xiaobo and his wife, Liu Xia, travel abroad to get the medical treatment he so desperately needs,” said Salil Shetty, Amnesty International’s secretary general.



“Liu Xiaobo is an inspiring figure whose only crime was to speak truth to power. He should never have spent a single day in jail, an injustice made even more tragic by the fact that his cancer was not diagnosed until it reached terminal phase. President Xi Jinping must do the right thing and order his immediate release.”



Earlier it emerged that China had invited medical experts from the US and Germany to help treat Liu, in an apparent softening of its stance before this week’s G20 summit in Germany.



Liu was jailed in 2009 for “inciting subversion of state power” after he helped write a petition known as “Charter 08” calling for sweeping political reforms.

The Guardian view on human rights in China: Liu Xiaobo is dying, free him | Editorial Read more

He was recently moved from jail to a hospital in the north-eastern city of Shenyang. The hospital made the decision at the request of the family and in consultation with the doctors already treating him, the Shenyang Justice Bureau stated on its website.

It provided no other details. Officials who answered the telephone at the hospital said they were unaware of the case.

A source close to Liu’s family said the invitation was a positive step that greatly increased transparency around his illness and the chance that he would receive the best possible treatment available.

“The fact that they specially chose the US and Germany suggests that the authorities are considering allowing Liu to travel to one of these two countries,” the source said, although there were still questions about how the doctors would be chosen and what access they would have.

However, Amnesty attacked the move, which it said appeared in part to be “an attempt to limit international criticism”.

Amnesty’s East Asia director, Nicholas Bequelin, told the Wall Street Journal China had imposed “a near-complete information blackout” around the dissident to limit the reputational damage that came from keeping Nobel laureates in prison.



“As long has having Liu Xiaobo die in China is likely to result in less embarrassment than him dying abroad, the authorities will continue with the same technique,” Bequelin said.

The US embassy in Beijing declined to comment.

The newly appointed US ambassador to China, Terry Branstad, said last week the US would like to see Liu treated elsewhere for his cancer.

The German embassy also declined to comment.

The move comes before Xi’s attendance at a G20 summit in Hamburg, Germany, on Friday and Saturday, where he will seek to project Chinese leadership on issues such as climate change and free trade.



Diplomatic sources in Beijing say China has been nervous that the issue of the Nobel peace prize winner could overshadow Xi’s appearance.

An open letter issued by a coalition of rights groups, including those representing Tibetans and Uighurs, on Wednesday urged G20 leaders to press China for the unconditional release of Liu and grant him freedom to travel wherever he wants.

Liu Xiaobo's unbearable fate is stark symbol of where China is heading | Tania Branigan Read more

“Liu Xiaobo’s 2010 Nobel peace prize illuminated the human and political rights of the people under China’s rule, and created a real sense of hope. We urge you not to let that sense of hope fade,” it said.

The government has said Liu is being given the best care possible and that he is being treated by renowned Chinese cancer experts.

However, a growing number of western politicians and international rights activists have expressed concern about the quality of Liu’s treatment and have said he should be given the choice to leave China if that was the best option.

The UN high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, has met Chinese officials regarding Liu, a spokeswoman said on Tuesday.

Chinese authorities told diplomats from Germany, the US and the EU on Friday that Liu could not be moved abroad due to his condition, sources briefed on the matter have told Reuters.

China’s foreign ministry has dismissed concerns from other countries about Liu, at least publicly, saying it was an internal matter for China.

ColinColin

China’s best-known political prisoner, the civil rights campaigner and Nobel peace prize winner Liu Xiaobo, has been released on medical parole after he was diagnosed with terminal liver cancer.

Liu, 61, is in the late stages of the disease, said Mo Shaoping, his lawyer, who has been in contact with Liu’s family. Liu is being treated at a hospital in the north-eastern city of Shenyang, near where he was being held. Another of Liu’s lawyers, Shang Baojun, said he was diagnosed in May.

“This type of late-stage cancer is very difficult to treat, it would have been easier if it was discovered sooner,” Shang said. “It’s extremely serious.”

Liu was arrested in 2008 after penning a pro-democracy manifesto called Charter 08, where he called for an end to one-party rule and improvements in human rights. Following a year in detention and a two-hour trial, he was sentenced in December 2009 to 11 years in prison for inciting subversion of state power.

Little has been heard from him since. When he was awarded the Nobel peace prize in 2010 he was represented by an empty chair.

Liu Xia, his wife, has been under house arrest since her husband won and has reportedly suffered from depression due to her isolation. She has not been formally charged with a crime despite her nearly seven years in detention. Liu Xia may not know her husband is sick, Mo said, as he has been unable to contact her.

A literary critic and scholar, Liu was previously jailed for two years in the wake of the 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy protests and subsequent massacre.



“Adding injury to insult, Liu Xiaobo has been diagnosed with a grave illness in prison, where he should never have been put in the first place,” said Patrick Poon, a researcher at Amnesty International in Hong Kong.

“The Chinese authorities should immediately ensure that Liu Xiaobo receives adequate medical care, effective access to his family and that he and all others imprisoned solely for exercising their human rights are immediately and unconditionally released.”

“The authorities should immediately and unconditionally lift all restrictions on his wife Liu Xia and let the two reunite as soon as possible,” Poon added.



The Shanghai-based legal scholar and human rights activist Zhang Xuezhong told Associated Press that Liu and has family had made a “tremendous sacrifice” for the cause of freedom and democracy in China.

“This is unfortunate news for him and his family, and it’s a blow to China’s democracy movement, as so many people have placed hope in him, and rightfully so,” Zhang said. “His life is so important that I think he should get the best possible treatment with full knowledge of his family, even if it means some compromises [with the government],” he added.

Liu’s brother-in-law was jailed in 2013 for fraud over a property dispute, but his lawyers claimed the case was politically motivated.

The Norwegian Nobel committee awarded Liu the peace prize for “his long and non-violent struggle for fundamental human rights in China”.



“Through the severe punishment meted out to him, Liu has become the foremost symbol of this wide-ranging struggle for human rights in China,” the committee said in 2010.

'Your Lifelong Prisoner' – Liu Xiaobo's poem from prison Read more

The prize infuriated the Chinese government and relations with Norway quickly deteriorated. Normal relations were only restored in December 2016, when the country said it “attaches high importance to China’s core interests and major concerns, will not support actions that undermine them, and will do its best to avoid any future damage to the bilateral relations”.

In 2015 the writers’ campaign group PEN International released a statement saying that it stood in “continued solidarity” with Liu, who was president of the Independent Chinese PEN Centre, and Liu Xia. The statement was signed by a number of high-profile writers, including Margaret Atwood and Ian Rankin.

Last year, in an effort to draw attention to his case, the US Senate voted to rename the street address used by the Chinese embassy in Washington to Liu Xiaobo Plaza, but the bill was vetoed by Barack Obama.

More than 1,400 political dissidents are detained in China, according to a US congressional database, but the number is probably even higher as information about topics deemed sensitive by the ruling Communist party is heavily censored.

Since coming to power in 2012, the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, has overseen a wide-ranging crackdown on civil society, including arresting feminist activists, human rights lawyers and book publishers.

ColinColin

Two decades after the UK handed it back to China, President Xi Jinping is in Hong Kong for the first time to celebrate the anniversary. The ‘one country, two systems’ principle was designed to preserve democratic freedoms in the wealthy former colony. After troubled years of protest at the perceived erosion of those rights, the Guardian meets young Hong Kong citizens struggling to afford property, those moving abroad for opportunities, leaders of the pro-democracy umbrella movement and movers in the pro-Beijing establishment



ColinColin

Xi Jinping tells reporters he wants to ‘map out the future’ on three-day trip that coincides with 20th anniversary of handover by British

The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, has vowed to bring “new glory” to Hong Kong at the start of a highly sensitive three-day tour of the former British colony designed to celebrate the 20th anniversary of its return to China.



In a brief speech after landing at Hong Kong’s international airport on Thursday morning, the Communist party chief said he had come to “map out the future” of this semi-autonomous city of 7.3 million citizens.

“I’m pleased to have set foot in Hong Kong once again … Hong Kong has always been in my heart,” said China’s authoritarian leader, whose almost five years in power have coincided with the most politically volatile period in the city’s post-handover history.

Xi’s rare “inspection tour” – his first to Hong Kong since becoming China’s top leader in late 2012 – has been timed to coincide with celebrations of two decades since it was handed back to China, on 1 July 1997, after more than 150 years of British colonial rule.

Huge crowds are expected on Saturday, with mass pro-democracy demonstrations and a 23-minute pro-Beijing firework display over Victoria Harbour planned.

Swaths of the city have been placed under an unprecedented security lockdown, with military helicopters buzzing through the skies and about 11,000 police officers – more than a third of the city’s force – being deployed in an attempt to shelter Xi from the protesters.

The area surrounding Xi’s hotel, the Grand Hyatt, and the Hong Kong convention and exhibition centre, where the main handover anniversary ceremony will take place, have been isolated and surrounded by two-metre high water-filled barriers.

Speaking after his arrival, Xi said the celebrations of Hong Kong’s return to the “motherland” represented “a happy occasion for the country as well as for Hong Kong”. “I wholeheartedly wish Hong Kong will create a brighter future,” he added.



Facebook Twitter Pinterest A police escort for Xi Jinping in Hong Kong. Photograph: Tyrone Siu/Reuters

Boris Johnson, the UK’s foreign secretary, said the anniversary of Hong Kong’s return to Chinese control rule was “a moment to reflect on Hong Kong’s immense achievements as a thriving and dynamic city, serving as a gateway to the biggest and fastest-growing markets in the world”.

He added: “The rule of law, an independent judiciary, and a free media have all been central to Hong Kong’s success. As we look to the future, Britain hopes that Hong Kong will make more progress towards a fully democratic and accountable system of government.”

However, activists and protest leaders – some of whom were arrested on the eve of Xi’s arrival – said the presidential visit came at a bleak time.



“Demosisto, a political party founded after the 2014 umbrella protests by campaigners including Joshua Wong, tweeted:

Demosistō 香港眾志 (@demosisto) Right across this celebratory skyscraper, we sit peacefully to tell the world: There’s nothing to celebrate. #HongKong is dying. pic.twitter.com/SW9dkNSia0

On Wednesday night protesters, including Wong, were arrested after storming a statue outside the building where Xi is expected to give a speech, unfurling banners calling for the release of Nobel peace prize laureate Liu Xiaobo, who was recently diagnosed with terminal liver cancer while in prison.

Under the “one country, two systems” formula agreed between Britain and China before handover, Hong Kong continues to enjoy far greater political freedoms than the authoritarian mainland, where a crackdown is under way.



However, activists say Xi’s reign has seen intensified efforts to thwart Hong Kong’s push for democracy as well as a growing erosion of the freedoms guaranteed to its citizens. The recent abduction of a group of local booksellers and the ousting of two democratically elected pro-independence lawmakers from Hong Kong’s parliament have reinforced fears that the city’s way of life is under siege.

“When democracy is not in sight, we need to take action to confront this system,” the Wong reportedly shouted as he was dragged into custody.

Martin Lee, a veteran democracy campaigner, urged Xi to use his visit to announce bold steps to win back the increasingly disillusioned hearts and minds of Hong Kong’s citizens, and particularly its youth. However, Lee, 79, said he feared Xi would spurn what was a “golden opportunity” to extend an olive branch to Hong Kong’s democracy movement.

“It’s so sad,” he told the Guardian. “If Xi Jinping doesn’t reverse the direction they are going in … then Hong Kong will soon become just another Chinese city – very quickly. There would be no dissent … no Joshua Wongs. That would be depressing. Hong Kong would not be Hong Kong.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Protest leader Joshua Wong is arrested after climbing on the Golden Bauhinia statue – a present from the Chinese government celebrating the return of Hong Kong to mainland China in 1997 – on Wednesday. Photograph: Roman Pilipey/EPA

Reporters had limited access to Xi’s activities on his first day in Hong Kong but the president was reported to have met top local politicians, including outgoing chief executive, Leung Chun-ying, and his successor, Carrie Lam, visited an arts hub and been serenaded by two young Cantonese opera singers.



Jason Ng, a Hong Kong based author who has written a book about its young protest generation, said he expected Xi would be “wrapped in a bubble several blocks wide” during his stay. “He is being taken on a North Korea-style, highly controlled, completely contrived tour of Hong Kong where everything is rosy and every Hong Kong citizen adores Xi and loves China.”

But Ng predicted that Xi would find it impossible to isolate himself from dissenting voices, with democracy activists planning a “mini-occupation” to welcome China’s leader.



“By marching we hope to send him the message that he is not seeing the real Hong Kong,” Ng said.



ColinColin

If Pyongyang’s claim to have successfully launched an intercontinental ballistic missile is confirmed, the regime would be closer to having the ability to strike the US mainland. We take a look back at North Korea’s nuclear dynasty and ask: could the country trigger a nuclear war?

• North Korea claims successful test of intercontinental ballistic missile

ColinColin

If claim of ICBM launch is confirmed, it could move regime closer to being able to strike US mainland

North Korea claims to have conducted its first test of an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) , a development that, if confirmed, could move the regime closer to being able to strike the US mainland and dramatically strengthen its hand in negotiations with Washington.

South Korean and Japanese officials said they were studying the data to confirm whether or not it was an ICBM, but analysts said it appeared the missile had the range to strike Alaska but not other parts of the continental US.

Later there were reports in the US that officials believe North Korea may have fired its first intercontinental missile, though there was no official public statement from the US about this.

The launch, which came as Americans prepared to mark Independence Day, triggered a Twitter outburst from President Donald Trump who urged China to act to “end this nonsense once and for all”.

In a joint statement released after the missile test, Russia and China condemned the launch and proposed that North Korea declare a moratorium on nuclear and missile tests, while at the same time calling on Washington to immediately halt deployment of its THAAD anti-missile system in South Korea.

In a rare announcement on state North Korean television, an emotional newsreader said Kim Jong-un had personally overseen the “landmark” test of a Hwasong-14 missile.

North Korea was now a “a strong nuclear power state” and had “a very powerful ICBM that can strike any place in the world,” the newsreader said.

She added that the missile had reached an altitude of 2,802km (1,741 miles) and flew 933km (580 miles) – longer and higher than any of the regime’s previous similar tests. Those figures roughly concurred with analysis by Japanese and South Korean officials.

Early indications were that the missile was a single-stage device.



But later, NBC News cited two unnamed US officials saying they now believed it was “two stage”, and CNN quoted one official saying it was a “probable” ICBM and that the ongoing assessment suggested a second-stage booster did ignite and produced additional flight for 30 seconds.



While the apparent advancement in North Korea’s missile technology will add to concerns that the regime is moving closer to developing the capacity to strike the US mainland, many analysts still doubt whether it can miniaturise a nuclear weapon sufficiently to fit it on to a missile. They also believe the regime is unlikely to have mastered the technology needed for an ICBM to survive re-entry into Earth’s atmosphere.

South Korea’s military confirmed that North Korea had fired an “unidentified ballistic missile” into the Sea of Japan – known in North Korea as the East Sea of Korea – from Banghyon in North Pyongan, a province near its border with China.

The timing of North Korea’s 11th launch this year – on the eve of the US Independence Day holiday and just before the start of the G20 summit in Hamburg – was significant. It came soon after Donald Trump met the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, in Washington, and held telephone discussions dominated by Pyongyang’s missile and nuclear weapons programmes with the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, and Japan’s prime minister, Shinzo Abe.

The missile landed in Japan’s exclusive economic zone, the South Korean military and Japanese government said.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest A screengrab from footage on North Korean TV purporting to show preparations for Tuesday’s missile test. Photograph: Korean state television

Tokyo strongly protested against what it called a clear violation of UN resolutions banning Pyongyang from developing ballistic missile technology.

North Korea's missile test: everything you need to know Read more

The US Pacific Command said it detected and tracked the “single launch of a land-based, intermediate-range ballistic missile” for 37 minutes near an airfield in Panghyon, about 60 miles north-west of Pyongyang - a flight time longer than any similar previous tests.

The joint statement from Russia and China, issued shortly after President Vladimir Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping held wide-ranging talks in the Kremlin, called on North Korea, South Korea and the United States to sign up to a Chinese de-escalation plan designed to defuse tensions around Pyongyang’s missile programme.

The plan would see North Korea suspend its ballistic missile programme and the United States and South Korea simultaneously call a moratorium on large-scale missile exercises, both moves aimed at paving the way for multilateral talks.

“The situation in the region affects the national interests of both countries,” the joint statement said. “Russia and China will work in close coordination to advance a solution to the complex problem of the Korean Peninsula in every possible way.”

The joint declaration also called on Washington to immediately halt deployment of its THAAD anti-missile system in South Korea, a move Washington says is necessitated by the North Korean missile threat. The statement said Washington was using North Korea as a pretext to expand its military infrastructure in Asia and risked upsetting the strategic balance of power in the area.

On Monday China’s ambassador to the United Nations had warned of “disastrous” consequences if world powers fail to find a way to ease tensions with North Korea that risked getting “out of control”.

North Korea has increased the frequency of tests this year as it attempts to develop a missile capable of carrying a miniaturised nuclear warhead as far as the US mainland – a geopolitical game-changer that Trump has vowed “won’t happen”.

The regime’s most recent missile test before Tuesday came on 8 June when it launched a new type of cruise missile that Pyongyang said was capable of striking US and South Korean warships “at will”.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Kim Jong-un studies the launch site for Tuesday’s missile test. Photograph: Korean state television

David Wright, co-director of the Global Security Program at the US-based Union of Concerned Scientists, said in a blogpost the initial assessments of the flight time and distance suggested the missile fired on Tuesday could have a maximum range of roughly 6,700km (4,160 miles). “That range would not be enough to reach the lower 48 states or the large islands of Hawaii, but would allow it to reach all of Alaska,” he said.

Shea Cotton, a researcher at the James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies in the US, suggested the launch was deliberately timed to coincide with the anniversary of the US declaration of independence. “It’s already 4th of July in North Korea,” he said on Twitter. “I somewhat suspect they’re shooting off some fireworks today specifically because of that.”

South Korea’s joint chiefs of staff immediately briefed Moon. Since taking office on 10 May, Moon has tried to push cautious engagement with Pyongyang, but the regime has continued its missile tests, insisting it has the right to develop a nuclear deterrent to counter what it calls growing military provocations by the US.

Trump and Moon agreed to apply “maximum pressure” to persuade North Korea to abandon its nuclear and ballistic missile programmes, but agreed they were open to dialogue with the regime “under the right circumstances”.

Trump declared the US had run out of patience with North Korea over its weapons programme. “Together, we are facing the threat of the reckless and brutal regime in North Korea,” he said. “The nuclear and ballistic missile programs of that regime require a determined response.”

ColinColin

Hong Kong’s last governor is ‘astonished’ at Britain’s behaviour and says it must be firmer as it searches for a post-EU trade relationship

The British government’s “kowtowing” to China on issues including human rights and Hong Kong’s quest for democracy will become increasingly craven following the UK’s departure from the European Union, the former colony’s last governor has warned.



In an interview with the Guardian marking the 20th anniversary of Hong Kong’s return to Chinese control, on 1 July 1997, Lord Patten attacked what he called London’s repeated failure to challenge Beijing over its erosion of the territory’s freedoms and autonomy.



The Conservative peer said a sequence of “outrageous breaches” of the Sino-British handover agreement – including the alleged abduction of a group of political booksellers – had prompted little more than “a slightly embarrassed clearing of the throat” and some “tut-tutting” from Downing Street.



How China changed Hong Kong: views from the city Read more

“On the whole, we have continued to operate under the delusion that unless you bow low enough you will never do any business in China,” Chris Patten said.



“I think we should be much firmer in standing up to China on some of these issues. Why should the Chinese tell … a western political leader whether or not he or she can meet the Dalai Lama? … Why should anybody in China be allowed to scold us for saying too much about turning atolls and reefs in the South China Sea into military bases?”



“It is astonishing that we have demeaned ourselves in the way we have. I don’t think that the only way you can have a good and constructive relationship with China is by behaving in that sort of craven way.”

Patten, who is now chancellor of the University of Oxford, said Britain’s “increasing disinclination” to inject principles into its foreign policy was enabling the ever-more repressive and aggressive policies coming out of Beijing.

But the kowtowing was only likely to intensify as a post-Brexit “Global Britain” sought to expand trade relationships with countries such as China.

“Are we more likely … to take a firm line with China – on trade issues, on economic issues, on political issues – on our own than we would within the EU?”

Play Video 24:19 Chalk Girl: the protester at the heart of Hong Kong’s democracy movement

“I don’t think that the outlook outside the European Union is one in which we are more likely to behave honourably towards Hong Kong than we have inside.”

“The worry is that there will never be a point at which we say to the Chinese: ‘No,’” Patten added.



Patten was speaking as thousands of Hong Kongers prepared to take to the streets to mark the 20th anniversary of handover and with the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, due to fly in for a politically sensitive three-day visit to oversee celebrations.



According to local reports, Xi, who has overseen a major crackdown on dissent since taking power in 2012, will review a unit of the People’s Liberation Army, visit a major infrastructure project – possibly a 19-mile bridge linking Hong Kong with the mainland – and swear in the city’s new chief executive, Carrie Lam. Lam was elected in March in a vote that involved just 0.03% of Hong Kong’s registered voters. The South China Morning Post said a “massive security blanket” had been cast over the city.



Thousands of protestors are expected to take to the streets on 1 July for an annual pro-democracy rally that has been held almost ever year since 1997.



Xi no evil: Hong Kong bans protest slogans as Chinese president visits Read more

Emily Lau, a veteran democracy campaigner who will join the march, said: “There are people who are very angry with Beijing for refusing to listen to our demands [for greater democracy] … If they continue with this very, very hostile policy of alienating us then I guess we cannot go forwards.”

Before his arrival Xi told Xinhua he hoped to see “a more beautiful tomorrow” in the former British colony, which enjoys greater freedoms than the mainland thanks to the “one country, two systems” formula agreed before Hong Kong’s return to China.



However, Patten, who governed Hong Kong for five years until 1997, said he feared Xi was determined to completely roll back the political freedoms guaranteed to its citizens under the handover accord.



“[Xi’s] game plan is that abducting people on the streets in Hong Kong shouldn’t be anything that causes any anxiety. I think the game plan would be that for people to call for greater democracy in Hong Kong or for greater respect for Hong Kong’s autonomy is the sort of thing that would get them locked up.”

Western democracies now had a duty to support young activists such as Joshua Wong who were fighting to prevent that happening.



“It shouldn’t just be Britain in our decadence which has to keep an eye on that. It’s also a matter for America and for other European countries.”



ColinColin

Countries say ties will not be restored until Gulf state breaks links with extremists while UAE threatens jail for sympathisers

Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates have increased the pressure on Qatar, insisting diplomatic and economic relations would not be restored until the tiny Gulf state breaks all links with the Muslim Brotherhood, Hamas and Iran.

The Saudi foreign minister, Adel al-Jubeir, who is due in Berlin for talks with his German counterpart on Wednesday, said it was up to Qatar, which denies funding extremist groups, to take action to relieve a block on air, sea and land links with its neighbours.



Qatar diplomatic crisis – what you need to know Read more

“Nobody wants to hurt Qatar. It has to choose whether it must move in one direction or another direction. We took this step with great pain so that it understands that these policies are not sustainable and must change,” he told reporters, He claimed Qatar was undermining the Palestinian Authority and Egypt in its support of Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood.

“We want to see Qatar implement the promises it made a few years back with regard to its support of extremist groups, to its hostile media and interference in affairs of other countries.”

The UAE foreign minister, Anwar Gargash, threatened more curbs if necessary and said Qatar needed to make “iron-clad” commitments to change policies on funding militants. The country also threatened anyone publishing expressions of sympathy towards Qatar with up to 15 years in prison and barred Qatari passport- or resident visa-holders entry.

“Strict and firm action will be taken against anyone who shows sympathy or any form of bias towards Qatar, or against anyone who objects to the position of the United Arab Emirates, whether it be through the means of social media or any type of written, visual or verbal form,” Gulf News quoted the UAE attorney general, Hamad Saif al-Shamsi, as saying.

The anti-Qatar alliance has been emboldened by Donald Trump, who threw his weight behind the Saudi-led effort to isolate the emirate in a surprise move on Tuesday. He suggested Qatar was funding extremism, but later spoke by phone with Saudi King Salman and stressed the need for Gulf unity.



The US defence secretary, James Mattis, also spoke to his Qatari counterpart to express commitment to the Gulf region’s security. Qatar hosts 10,000 US military personnel at al-Udeid, the US regional military headquarters and base for offensive operations against Isis in Syria and Iraq.



US officials scramble to limit Trump's diplomatic damage over Qatar tweets Read more

The German foreign minister, Sigmar Gabriel, called for restraint in an interview with Handelsblatt before his Saudi meeting. “Apparently, Qatar is to be isolated more or less completely and hit existentially. Such a ‘Trumpification’ of relations in a region already susceptible to crises is particularly dangerous,” he said.



Ordinary Qataris were meanwhile loading up on supplies in supermarkets, fearing shortages. Officials told Reuters on Wednesday it was in talks with Turkey and Iran to secure food supplies by air and the government had large strategic food reserves in Doha. There is enough grain in the markets to last four weeks, officials believe.



The crisis, the worst to hit the Gulf states in 30 years, has its origins in rivalry between Iran and Saudi Arabia. Support for Saudi Arabia from Trump is believed to have empowered Riyadh to act against its neighbour, which it believes has been too supportive of the Muslim Brotherhood and not sufficiently opposed to Iran.



The final straw appears to have been reports in the Qatari media last month that its ruler had made a speech that appeared friendly to Iran. The Qataris deny the emir made the remarks and blamed hackers.



CNN on Tuesday reported that US intelligence officials believe Russian hackers planted the false news story. FBI experts visited Qatar in May to analyse an alleged cyberbreach, the US broadcaster said.



Qatar’s government said the news report on 23 May attributed false remarks to the emirate’s ruler that appeared friendly to Iran and Israel, and questioned whether Trump would last in office.



The Qatari foreign minister said the FBI had confirmed the hack and the planting of fake news. “Whatever has been thrown as an accusation is all based on misinformation and we think that the entire crisis is being based on misinformation. It was started based on fabricated news, being wedged and being inserted in our national news agency, which was hacked and proved by the FBI.

Moscow on Wednesday denied the allegations. “We’re getting tired of reacting to unsubstantiated banalities,” Andrei Krutskikh, a Kremlin adviser on cybersecurity, told the Interfax news agency. “Whatever happens it is hackers. It’s a stale claim and as ever, there is zero evidence, and conclusions are drawn before the incident is even investigated,” he said.

ColinColin

Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin vow to work together on peaceful solution to North Korea crisis – in sharp contrast to US president’s sabre-rattling

The leaders of China and Russia have vowed to work together to peacefully defuse the deepening crisis over North Korea’s nuclear and missile programmes – a diplomatic double act that contrasts sharply with Donald Trump’s crude threats and pressure tactics.

The joint declaration reflected a broader, ongoing strategic Sino-Russian alignment that has passed largely unremarked in the west. It has been encouraged by Trump’s often erratic, unfocused behaviour, and the resulting opportunities and dangers arising from weakened American global leadership.

The China-Russia juggernaut is beginning to roll. And like a comic-strip fall-guy with his legs tied to the rails, Trump lies directly in its path.

North Korea's missile test: everything you need to know Read more

Speaking during a two-day visit to Moscow on Tuesday, Xi Jinping, China’s president, and Vladimir Putin, Russia’s leader, agreed to “jointly push for a proper settlement … via dialogue and negotiation” with North Korea, Chinese news reports said.

Russia’s foreign ministry later released a statement saying the two countries had agreed a joint position designed to defuse tensions around North Korea’s missile programme.

Their collaboration extends far beyond the Korean peninsula. “The Chinese leader emphasised the need to boost cooperation and ‘steadfastly support each other in … defending respective sovereignty, national security and development interests’,” the official Xinhua news agency said.

The summit marked the third time Xi and Putin conferred in person this year. Since taking power in 2012, Xi has met his Russian counterpart more than 20 times.

Putin described the summit as “a major event in bilateral relations”. Economic deals worth $10bn were expected to be signed. Putin also enrolled Xi in the order of St Andrew the First-Called, one of Russia’s highest honours.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Donald Trump faces having his bluff called over North Korea. Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images

Russia and China increasingly collaborate on key international issues, frequently voting in unison at the UN security council. The two leaders will travel to Hamburg later this week for the G20 summit, where they will hold separate meetings with Trump.

The Moscow summit coincided with North Korea’s testing of a suspected intercontinental ballistic missile. If confirmed, it would mark a significant advance in its offensive capabilities.

The test produced familiar protests from Japan and South Korea. But both countries, traditional US allies, are looking northwards for help, not to Washington. Shinzo Abe, Japan’s prime minister, said he was specifically counting on a “constructive” Chinese and Russian role, the implication being that Trump was making matters worse.

South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, was elected on a platform of re-engagement with the North that puts him at odds with Trump’s approach. Following an inconclusive White House meeting last week, Moon is under intense Chinese-Russian pressure to halt deployment of the Thaad US missile defence system targeting Pyongyang’s forces.

The deployment “gravely harms the strategic security interests of China, Russia and other countries in the region,” Xi said this week. That’s diplomat-speak for “knock it off”. China’s UN ambassador, meanwhile, warned of “disastrous” consequences if a diplomatic solution was not found.

The Chinese and Russian leaders are also united by the conundrum of how to handle Trump. And both see a chance for advantage. Trump personally appealed for Chinese help on North Korea when he met Xi in Florida in April, and later claimed to have succeeded.

But the White House has since expressed irritation that Beijing is not doing enough. Now Trump faces having his bluff called. He is caught between his bombastic sabre-rattling and his need for a diplomatic “win” that avoids starting a war.

Xi’s price for assisting Trump, when they meet in Hamburg, could be more US concessions on contentious bilateral issues. But he will have to tread carefully, given Trump’s volatility.

Trump is in a weak position with Putin, too, given various investigations into his pre-election relationship with Moscow. Like Xi, Hamburg gives Putin a stage on which to play the responsible world statesman while squeezing a floundering Trump on things that matter most to him, such as lifting Ukraine-related sanctions.

Amateur Trump needs to raise his game. Body-slams won’t work with Russia’s seasoned judo black-belt strongman.

ColinColin

Among thousands of second world war records available to the public for the first time, detailing the activities of more than 1 million women who joined the Women’s Voluntary Services to help with the war effort on the Home Front, there are glimpses of how desperate life was for many among the jolly accounts of mended toys, gloves knitted out of recycled scraps of wool, darned jumpers and cakes improvised from improbable ingredients.

One of the 31,400 pages of diaries, detailed reports submitted in quadruplicate every month from more than 1,300 cities, towns and villages, recounts the aftermath of a flying bomb hitting the Hertfordshire town of Rickmansworth – one of 97 that fell on the small town during the war killing 91, injuring more than 300, and leaving thousands homeless.

The report tells how a woman “in a very upset and nervous condition” had made her way with her three children to the WVS in nearby Aylesbury after the blast. She was told to go home and promised that the street representative would take special care of her and make frequent visits during alerts. The report adds the grim detail: “The woman is a pacifist, and a very unpopular person in her road.”

Secrets of much-loved wartime cartoonist Giles revealed in new book Read more

After a series of air raids on Bath – in which a child who had been evacuated from London was one of the victims – the report admitted “a few Street Leaders wavered, but in the main the spirit behind the Housewives Service was not lost”. It continued: “Several Street Leaders built outdoor Cooking Stoves in their Streets, of which they had seen a demonstration only a week previously.” The report includes the number of gas masks recovered for repair, disinfection and re-issue from “children, deceased persons, salvaged etc.”

In Grimsby they were mending and remodelling clothes for people who had lost everything. The donations included three boxes of clothes sent by Red Cross workers in Bolivia.

There was cake as well as tea to keep up spirits in the tiny Hertfordshire village of Stone – but the cook wasn’t at all keen on sampling her own efforts. ”The organiser found catering a little difficult, one night the teas served numbered 28 and the next 430, and the cake permits were almost negligible. However, thanks to dried eggs, dried milk, and even powdered saccharin, the organiser, with a cookery book in one hand, managed to make what at any rate looked like cakes. She was very thankful that she didn’t have to eat any of the efforts herself.”



The insistence on typed returns in quadruplicate, with copies sent to headquarters and regional offices, ensured that the bulk of the records survived even when the main archive was partly weeded in the 1950s to remove anything considered uninteresting. The importance of the archive, of the war as experienced at the grassroots, was marked in 2010 when it was recognised by Unesco as part of the UK contribution to the Memory of the World register.

The online archive was launched as an English Heritage blue plaque honouring Stella Reading, the founder of the WVS, was unveiled at the organisation’s wartime headquarters, 41 Tothill Street in Westminster, now a hotel. Reading, who was born in Constantinople in 1894, and would become a life peer and the first woman to take a seat in the House of Lords in her own right, ran the organisation which she founded in 1938 and was termed “the army that Hitler forgot” from a single room in the building. It grew to a membership of more than 1 million, estimated as one woman in ten, by 1942.

The plaque was unveiled by Dame Patricia Routledge, the actor best known as Hyacinth Bucket, star of the BBC comedy Keeping Up Appearances. She said: “The women of the WVS made great sacrifices for this country, but the breadth of their contribution has been hidden from view until now.”

ColinColin

As executive director of the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), Babatunde Osotimehin, who has died suddenly aged 68, provided a strong voice on issues affecting young women, including child marriage and female genital mutilation (FGM). He began the first of two four-year terms in the post in 2011, following high-profile roles in public health in his native Nigeria.

Despite his gentle demeanour, Osotimehin was tough when it came to pushing for commitments to improve family planning and maternal mortality rates. Much of his first term was concerned with upholding a global agreement negotiated in Cairo in 1994, designed to ensure greater access to education and family planning and to reduce child and maternal mortality.

He was also a fierce opponent of child marriage and FGM – two traditional practices that became the focus of his second term and the ending of which he characterised as “our unfinished business”. When he voiced his concerns, he liked to refer to himself as an “honorary woman” and he was a strong supporter of the Global Media Campaign to End FGM. At the time of his death he had been due to attend the New York premiere of the Guardian feature documentary on the subject, Jaha’s Promise, at the headquarters of the UN.

During his time at UNFPA, Osotimehin pursued three goals: to have no preventable maternal deaths, no unmet demand for family planning and to eliminate gender-based violence against women and girls. In support of the last of these, he managed a nine-year partnership with Unicef to reduce FGM across 17 countries, the largest programme in the world dedicated to ending the harmful practice that affects more than 200 million girls.

In tackling this issue and others, Osotimehin endorsed the use of culturally sensitive programmes run by local providers. He believed that if communities could engage in the programmes designed for their benefit, the positive effects would last much longer.

The organisation is funded mainly by governments and challenges arose when their visions did not meet his. Earlier this year, the Trump administration withdrew US funding, alleging UNFPA support for or management of “a programme of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilisation” in China, though the assertion has since been discredited.

Aside from a brief period under President Barack Obama during which the US was the UNFPA’s second largest donor, three of the last five US administrations have withheld funding, a challenge for which Osotimehin said he was prepared.

Babatunde was born in Ijebu Igbo, Ogun State, Nigeria, the eldest of eight children of Alaba Osotimehin, a teacher, and his wife, Morenike (nee Olukoya), who ran a business selling organic fruit. Early on he was “neglectful” of his studies, but his father helped him through a bad period at school and he completed a degree in medical sciences at the University of Ibadan.

He later graduated in medicine from Birmingham University in 1979 before returning to Ibadan as a professor in 1980. He was appointed provost of the university in 1990.

When, in the 2000s, the HIV/Aids crisis loomed large in Nigeria, Osotimehin became concerned with reducing transmission and – mindful that 58% of Nigerian HIV sufferers were women – took on roles as director general of the Nigerian National Agency for the Control of Aids and chairman of the National Action Committee on Aids. He also became, from 2002 to 2008, project manager of a World Bank-assisted HIV/Aids programme in Nigeria that helped the government to increase the number of Nigerian people on antiretroviral treatment to 250,000. Despite relative success, he said in an interview with the Guardian that the focus on HIV/Aids had “cost family planning a decade” – a remark that proved controversial with others involved in global health.

From 2008 to 2010 he was minister of health in President Goodluck Jonathan’s cabinet, a post in which he helped to upgrade Nigeria’s medical system by ensuring that 15% of the national budget was allocated to healthcare. He also had success in creating Nigeria’s first overall primary healthcare plan, which managed to impose some sort of order across the differing ideologies of the country’s 36 states.

In 1973, he married Olufunke Olukoya. She survives him, along with their son, four daughters and four grandchildren.

• Babatunde Osotimehin, doctor and public health administrator, born 6 February 1949; died 4 June 2017

ColinColin

Warm temperatures create perilous ice conditions off Newfoundland, trapping fishing boats and tankers: ‘It’s not something you would expect to see there’

Scientists in Canada have been forced to abandon an expedition to the Hudson Bay to research the impact of climate change, after warming temperatures created perilous ice conditions off the coast of Newfoundland.



In late May, 40 scientists from five Canadian universities set off from Quebec City on the icebreaker and Arctic research vessel CCGS Amundsen. The expedition was the first leg of a four-year, C$17m research project designed to delve into the effects of climate change on Hudson Bay.

Cold snap: massive iceberg just off coast draws Canadians eager for close-up Read more

The icebreaker was soon diverted. Dense ice – up to 8 metres (25ft) thick – had filled the waters off the northern coast of Newfoundland, trapping fishing boats and ferries.

“It was a really dramatic situation,” said David Barber, the expedition’s chief scientist. “We were getting search and rescue calls from fishing boats that were stranded in the ice and tankers that were stranded trying to get fuel into the communities. Nobody could manage this ice because it was far too heavy to get through.”

Barber, a climate change scientist at the University of Manitoba, and the other scientists did what they could to help the Coast Guard rescue the vessels and carved a path for the tankers. They also took the time to study the ice that surrounded them, discovering that much of it was the multiyear ice typically seen in the high Arctic.

It was an unexpected find, said Barber, given the time of year and how far south they were. “It’s not something you would expect to see there and not something we’ve seen there before,” he said. “In the high Arctic, climate change is causing the ice to get thinner and there to be less of it. What that does is that it increases the mobility of ice.”

The decision to cancel the first leg of the expedition was made after it became clear that continuing north would interrupt search and rescue operations and probably put lives at risk.

Arctic stronghold of world’s seeds flooded after permafrost melts Read more

The irony was not lost on Barber. “We’re doing a large-scale climate change study and before we can even get going on it, climate change is conspiring to force us to cancel that study.”



The decision was a costly one, as the project had already spent hundreds of thousands of dollars getting the scientists and their gear on the vessel. The next leg of the expedition, scheduled to start on 6 July, is expected to go ahead, but the study will probably need to be extended by at least six months and may require more funding, he said. “It’s a real mess.”

Barber – who has spent decades researching the impact of climate change on sea ice – described his week spent on the frontlines of battling a changing climate as a stark reminder of the reality the world is facing. “We’re very poorly prepared for climate change,” he said. “We pay lip service to the fact that we think we know it’s coming and society is trying to grapple with the complexity of it, but when it really comes down to brass tacks, our systems are ill prepared for it.”

ColinColin



An extraordinary palio is a third palio, which may take place between May and September. It is associated with events or anniversaries of major importance: the last coincided with the beginning of the new millennium.

Photograph: Claudio Giovannini/AFP/Getty Images

ColinColin

Kim Jong-un saw the opportunity for maximum mischief offered by the most auspicious date in US history to launch a missile, literally and verbally

It is a fair to say that the reporter tasked with working Kim Jong-un’s comments into North Korea’s latest statement on Tuesday’s intercontinental ballistic missile test did their job with even more relish than usual.

As taunts go, Kim’s comments, carried by the state KCNA news agency, raised the insult index several notches from Donald Trump’s suggestion a day earlier that his North Korean counterpart find a more productive use of his time than developing a nuclear deterrent.

North Korea missile test a 'new threat to world', says US amid show of military force Read more

The international response to the launch will only have inspired Kim to wring every last drop of propaganda value from the wave of opprobrium emanating from the White House and the Pentagon.

His response was straight from the North Korean propaganda playbook – designed to both grab the world’s attention and remind his domestic audience that, five-and-a-half years after his coronation following the sudden death of his father, Kim Jong-il, he has dramatically strengthened his country’s hand.

While Trump’s secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, attempted to galvanise world opinion, the KCNA’s description of Kim “feasting his eyes” on the ICBM and breaking into a “broad smile” – complete with photos of him punching the air in the company of delirious generals – would not have been out of place had he been attending an inter-Korean football match, with the North 3-0 up with only minutes on the clock.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest North Korean leader Kim Jong-un reacts during the test-fire of intercontinental ballistic missile. Photograph: KCNA/Reuters

Just as significant anniversaries in the North Korean calendar provide opportunities for the Kim dynasty to burnish its reputation at home, Kim was canny enough to spy the opportunity for maximum mischief offered by the most auspicious date in US history.

According to KCNA, he described the ICBM as a gift for the “American bastards” as they celebrated the anniversary of their country’s independence. Kim did not stop there, blithely urging his nuclear scientists to “frequently send big and small ‘gift packages’ to the Yankees” in the form of yet more missile and nuclear tests.

After inspecting the Hwasong-14 missile, he “expressed satisfaction, saying it looked as handsome as a good-looking boy and was well made”.

This, of course, was the potentially game-changing development in North Korea’s brinkmanship with the US that Trump vowed would never happen.

But with a succession of high-level – and occasionally brutal – purges of would-be challengers at home, experts say Kim is now more closely associated with North Korean military might than his father or grandfather, the country’s founder Kim Il-sung.

“Kim Jong-il’s legacy was mixed – he let the army run the country for 10 years because he was afraid of a coup,” said Robert Kelly, a North Korea expert at Pusan National University. “Kim Jong-un has tied himself to the success of the nuclear programme, which is why denuclearisation is not going to happen.

Trump’s public comments on North Korea had played into the stereotype of Americans propagated by the state’s media.

'Guest workers': The North Korean expats forced to feed the regime Read more

“The US is central to North Korean propaganda, so when Trump talks about sending an armada to the Korean peninsula, or bombing North Korea, that plays into their hands.”

Nicholas Smith, a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Canterbury in New Zealand, believes that Kim’s rhetoric and actions are “a carefully crafted strategy of brinkmanship, designed mostly for maintaining his domestic grip on power”.

“The biggest challenge in his position as supreme leader – one all autocrats face – is how to maintain his authoritarian rule,” Smith wrote in an opinion piece for the Conversation.



“Kim Jong-un, like his father Kim Jong-il, has been able to pursue this strategy of brinkmanship with great success, at least for domestic purposes. This is mainly because despite all the international repercussions to date – ostracism, sanctions, and threats of intervention – China has been willing to prop up North Korea.”

The retaliatory launch of ballistic missiles by US and South Korean forces on Wednesday morning will not only have reminded remind Kim of the military might of his enemies, but reinforced a tenet of Kim dynasty propaganda: that North Korea is surrounded by hostile forces intent on its eradication.

“Kim Jong-un loves this, because it reinforces the image of North Korea standing up to a big, bullying imperialist,” Kelly said. “It fits exactly with the way North Korea wants to be portrayed, rather than the rogue, gangster state that it really is.”

“It would help if Trump backed away a little. His childish, personalised tweets bring the US down to the level of the North Koreans, and we know from the racist and sexist things it said about Barack Obama and Park Geun-hye that you are never going to win a mud-slinging contest with the KCNA.”

No one knows if Kim ever received the copy of Trump’s Art of the Deal that Dennis Rodman presented to the North Korean sports minister during his recent visit to Pyongyang. If the deal in question is how to wrong-foot a far more powerful nemesis, then he can probably live without the advice.

Having thrust his country to the top of the US’s foreign policy “to do” list and cemented his domestic image as all that stands between North Korea and US aggression, round one of the post-ICBM era must surely go to Kim. In Trump’s words: a pretty smart cookie indeed.



ColinColin

When Edward Snowden met journalists in his cramped room in Hong Kong's Mira hotel in June, his mission was ambitious. Amid the clutter of laundry, meal trays and his four laptops, he wanted to start a debate about mass surveillance. He succeeded beyond anything the journalists or Snowden himself ever imagined. His disclosures about the NSA resonated with Americans from day one. But they also exploded round the world. For some, like Congresswoman Zoe Lofgren, it is a vitally important issue, one of the biggest of our time: nothing less than the defence of democracy in the digital age.

stop auto-play Zoe Lofgren US congresswoman

But the intelligence agencies dismiss such claims, arguing that their programs are constitutional, and subject to rigorous congressional and judicial oversight. Secrecy, they say, is essential to meet their overriding aim of protecting the public from terrorist attacks.

stop auto-play Stewart Baker Former NSA general counsel

The debate has raged across time zones: from the US and Latin America to Europe and to Asia. Barack Obama cancelled a trip to Moscow in protest at Russian president Vladimir Putin's protection of Snowden. Brazilian president Dilma Rousseff cancelled a state visit to Washington in protest at the US spying on her. Bolivian president Evo Morales's plane was forced down in Vienna amid suspicion that Snowden was being smuggled out of Russia. In Germany, a "livid" Angela Merkel accused the US of spying on her, igniting a furore that has seen the White House concede that new constraints on the NSA's activities may be necessary. Meanwhile, in Britain, prime minister David Cameron accused the Guardian of damaging national security by publishing the revelations, warning that if it did not "demonstrate some social responsibility it would be very difficult for government to stand back and not to act".

Caught in a net US internet companies, their co-operation with the NSA exposed by Snowden's documents, fear a worldwide consumer backlash, and claim they were forced into co-operation by the law.

DIANNE FEINSTEIN Democratic US senator KEITH ALEXANDER Director of the NSA BARACK OBAMA US president DAVID CAMERON UK prime minister DILMA ROUSSEFF Brazilian president LADAR LEVISON Lavabit founder RON WYDEN Democratic US senator JAMES CLAPPER US director of national intelligence EDWARD SNOWDEN Computer analyst and whistleblower ANGELA MERKEL German chancellor MARISSA MAYER Yahoo CEO

Much of the NSA’s defence is that the public should be unconcerned, summed up by the dictum: “If you have nothing to hide, you have nothing to fear.” But civil liberties groups such as the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the American Civil Liberties Union warn that surveillance goes well beyond what Congress intended and what the US constitution allows.

stop auto-play Chris Soghoian Principal technologist, ACLU

Cell phones, laptops, Facebook, Skype, chat-rooms: all allow the NSA to build what it calls ‘a pattern of life’, a detailed profile of a target and anyone associated with them. And the number of people caught up in this dragnet can be huge.

Three degrees of separation You don't need to be talking to a terror suspect to have your communications data analysed by the NSA. The agency is allowed to travel "three hops" from its targets — who could be people who talk to people who talk to people who talk to you. Facebook, where the typical user has 190 friends, shows how three degrees of separation gets you to a network bigger than the population of Colorado. How many people are three "hops" from you?

Number of friends: Login to Facebook ? Connect to Facebook to get your friend count. Your information will not be saved. LOGOUT 1ST DEGREE: FRIENDS FRIENDS 2ND DEGREE: FRIENDS OF FRIENDS FRIENDS OF FRIENDS 3RD DEGREE: FRIENDS OF FRIENDS OF FRIENDS FRIENDS OF FRIENDS OF FRIENDS Calculations are based on an analysis of Facebook that reports a typical user has an average of 190 friends and 14% of those friends are friends with each other.

Faced with growing public and political concern over the quantities of data it is collecting, the NSA has sought to reassure people, arguing that it collected only a tiny proportion of the world’s internet traffic, roughly equivalent to a “dime on a basketball court”. But in reality, that is still a huge amount of data. The Library of Congress, one of the biggest libraries in the world, gathers 5 terabytes a month. The NSA sucks up much, much more.

Since you began reading this, the NSA has selected terabytes terabytes of data for review. That's about

two-hour HD movies.

The NSA say it needs all this data to help prevent another terrorist attack like 9/11. In order to find the needle in the haystack, they argue, they need access to the whole haystack.

stop auto-play Stewart Baker Former NSA general counsel

Snowden recognises the value of the NSA in counter-terrorism, but thinks the spy agency has dangerously over-reached itself. He is a fugitive from US law, in exile in Russia. But the debate he wanted to start when he decided to become a whistleblower is now happening.

ColinColin

