Donald Trump’s historic presidency will look unlike any other that’s come before it. From his outsider status in Washington to his family’s continued residence in New York to his complicated business empire, each episode of this podcast will focus on one aspect of Trump’s time in the White House that defies conventions and ask the question, “Can he do that?”

Hosted by Allison Michaels and co-hosted each week by a different Post reporter, “Can He Do That?” features original reporting that will illuminate the ways Donald Trump can reshape the presidency and explain what that means for people in the United States and the rest of the world.

ColinColin

President Trump on Monday injected himself into an emotionally charged end-of-life case overseas, saying “we would be delighted” to help British parents who have sought highly experimental treatment in the United States for their terminally ill infant.

The unusual overture by a U.S. president — which Trump announced on Twitter — came a day after Pope Francis weighed in on the fate of 11-month-old Charlie Gard, whose case captured worldwide attention when European courts decided the boy should be removed from life support over the wishes of his parents.

The pontiff said on Twitter that “to defend human life, above all when it is wounded by illness, is a duty of love that God entrusts to all.” The courts had decided that the treatment being sought in the United States would probably only cause more harm to the child.

White House spokeswoman Helen Aguirre Ferre said Trump is seeking to help a family in a “heartbreaking situation” and that members of his administration had spoken to the Gards in calls facilitated by the British government.

“The president is just trying to be helpful, if at all possible,” Ferre said, adding that Trump had not spoken directly to the family. She declined to name the doctor and U.S. hospital that could provide treatment, citing “legal issues.”

This is an undated family photo of Chris Gard and Connie Yates with their son Charlie at Great Ormond Street Hospital in London. (Family photo/AP)

Charlie has a rare genetic condition and resulting brain damage that has robbed him of the ability to move his arms and legs, eat or breathe on his own.

[This terminally ill infant will be allowed to die. But first, his parents will say goodbye.]

Trump’s overture came ahead of a trip this week to Germany for a G-20 summit, where he will meet with British Prime Minister Theresa May, among other European leaders.

May has not taken a position on the case and did not offer any public response Monday to Trump’s tweet. Other British politicians have expressed sympathy for Charlie’s parents but have largely refrained from expressing opinions about the case, saying that it is a matter for his family, his doctors and the courts.

Trump is embroiled at home in a fierce debate in Congress over legislation to revamp the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama’s signature health-care initiative. While Trump has promised better health care for all Americans, an analysis by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office projected 22 million fewer people could have insurance within a decade as a result of the Senate bill written largely by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.).

The president’s proposition Monday also offered the latest example of his ability to elevate events through messages to his more than 33 million followers on Twitter. Charlie’s ordeal had prompted outpourings of support from people in Britain and across the world, but it received far more attention in the U.S. media on Monday than it had previously.

Trump’s action was applauded by antiabortion groups, which were broadly supportive of his campaign last year and have been pleased with his tenure thus far, including his pick of Neil M. Gorsuch for the Supreme Court.

President Trump pauses as he speaks during the “Celebrate Freedom” event, a gathering of Christian evangelicals at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts on Saturday. (Carolyn Kaster/AP)

“The fact that President Trump would speak out on behalf of Charlie Gard shows a remarkable sensitivity to the life issue and a depth of commitment that evangelicals and faithful Catholics will find encouraging and inspiring,” said Ralph Reed, chairman of the Faith and Freedom Coalition.

[Pope Francis presents Trump with a ‘politically loaded gift’: His encyclical on climate change]

Carol Tobias, president of the National Right to Life Committee, said she was not surprised by Monday’s events.

“This is a story that is tugging not only at the heartstrings of pro-life America, but everyone, I think,” she said, noting that the Gards have been raising money online to come to the United States. “It just seems cruel and heartless for the decision-makers in the U.K. to say, ‘We’re sorry, we’re not going to give you this chance.’ ”

Charlie’s case was taken to the European Court of Human Rights, which declined to hear the matter last week, upholding previous court rulings that it was in the infant’s best interest to withdraw life support.

In a ruling in April, Justice Nicholas Francis of the Family Division of the High Court of Justice wrote that there was “unanimity among the experts” that the therapy could not repair structural brain damage, and he noted the therapy in question had never even been tested on mice.

If Charlie were in a U.S. hospital, or able to get into one, history suggests his parents would find doctors more receptive to their wishes that life support continue, according to bioethicist Arthur L. Caplan.

“We don’t like to abandon people. We’re very hopeful,” said Caplan, a professor of bioethics at New York University’s Langone Medical Center. “We tend to have a strong religious element in there, that’s part of the culture. [And] we love our technology.”

Only one state, Texas, has a law that allows physicians to reject parental wishes and terminate life support, he said.

Elsewhere, there is the case of teenager Jahi McMath, who was moved from a hospital in California to New Jersey in 2013 after a coroner declared her brain dead. She remains on life support there.

In some respects, Gard’s case is reminiscent of that of Terri Schiavo, a Florida woman who was left in a persistent vegetative state after a cardiac arrest.

Her husband, who was her legal guardian, sought to have her feeding tube removed, but her parents disagreed. That prompted a prolonged legal fight that ended after courts ruled in her husband’s favor and life support was removed.

[President largely sidesteps the bully pulpit in pushing health-care bill]

Charlie was born in August with a rare genetic condition called infantile-onset encephalomyopathic mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome, or MDDS, according to court records.

Weeks after birth, he was struggling to hold up his head and was not gaining weight. At the two-month mark, he had become lethargic, and his breathing had become shallow, records show.

Charlie was transported to Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, where he has remained since. Earlier this year, doctors concluded that nothing more could be done.

The Italian news agency ANSA reported Monday that officials at a Vatican-owned Italian hospital will ask their counterparts at the London hospital whether Charlie can be moved from that facility to Rome.

Regarding possible treatment in Rome, Bambino Gesù Hospital President Mariella Enoc said Monday: “We know that it is a desperate case and that there are no effective therapies. . . . We are close to the parents in prayer and, if this is their desire, willing to take their child, for the time he has left to live.”

Vatican spokesman Greg Burke said in a statement that Francis has called for Charlie’s parents to be able to care for him until his death.

“The Holy Father follows with affection and emotion the case of little Charlie Gard and expresses his own closeness to his parents,” the statement read, according to Vatican Radio. “For them he prays, hoping that their desire to accompany and care for their own child to the end is not ignored.”

Griff Witte in London contributed to this report.

ColinColin

Russian President Vladimir Putin meets with Vietnamese President Tran Dai Quang at the Kremlin on June 29. This week, Putin will meet with President Trump. (Alexei Druzhinin / Sputnik / Kremlin Pool/EPA)

President Trump promised voters that he would strike “a great deal” with Russia and its autocratic president, Vladimir Putin. He has repeatedly labeled an investigation of Russian meddling in the U.S. election as “a hoax,” and he even bragged to Russian officials about firing the FBI director leading the probe.

Now nearly six months into his presidency, Trump is set to finally meet Putin at a summit this week in Hamburg after a stop here in Warsaw — severely constrained and facing few good options that would leave him politically unscathed.



If Trump attempts to loosen sanctions against Russia for its involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine or its interference in the 2016 U.S. election, Congress could defy him by pursuing even stronger penalties. And if he offers platitudes for Putin without addressing Russia’s election meddling, it will renew questions about whether Trump accepts the findings of his own intelligence officials that Russia intended to disrupt the democratic process on his behalf.

“The president is boxed in,” said Nicholas Burns, who was U.S. ambassador to NATO under President George W. Bush. “Why would you give Putin any kind of concession at the first meeting? What has he done to deserve that?”

He added, “If you try to curry favor, offer concessions, pull back on the pressure, he’ll take advantage. He’ll see weakness in a vacuum.”

(Reuters)

Already, Moscow is clamoring for the Trump administration to return two Russian compounds in the United States that were seized by the Obama administration in retaliation for Russian meddling in the election. And the Trump administration signaled in May that it would be open to returning the properties.

Yet in the Senate, there is a rare near-unanimity in favor of tough sanctions against Russia. Last month, the Senate voted 97 to 2 for a bill that would put new sanctions in place for Russia’s election meddling and would constrain Trump’s ability to lift existing penalties. The White House was forced to step up its lobbying of Republicans in the House to slow the progress of a similar measure.

Among the foreign policy experts who support Trump’s push for improved relations with Russia, there is growing frustration that the current political climate and Trump’s actions have made that goal all but impossible.

“It has been extraordinarily difficult for Trump, even if he had the means to do so, to do what is in the vital national interest, that is, improve relations with Russia,” said Jack Matlock, who was ambassador to the Soviet Union under President Ronald Reagan. “Treating them as if they are enemies is absolutely absurd, and yet it permeates much of the attitude in Congress.”

The Trump administration, meanwhile, has been moving on multiple fronts to soften the U.S. stance on Russia.

[Trump is struggling to stay calm on Russia, one morning call at a time]

Trump wants Russia’s cooperation on a number of issues, including the fight against the Islamic State group in Syria and Russia’s use of North Korean laborers whose pay goes directly to the regime in Pyongyang, despite its nuclear weapons program.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has tried to ward off Congress from imposing more sanctions on Russia for its involvement in Ukraine, saying that getting tough now could hamper cooperation on other issues like fighting the Islamic State. Tillerson also said last month that the administration is not necessarily wedded to the Minsk agreement to end the fighting in Ukraine if something else would meet the same goals. That’s a shift in position since March, when he told a meeting of NATO foreign ministers that the United States would not ease sanctions until Russia meets its Minsk commitments.

“The president asked me to ­begin a re-engagement process with Russia to see if we can first stabilize that relationship so it does not deteriorate further, and then can we identify areas of mutual interest where perhaps we can begin to rebuild some level of trust and some level of confidence that there are areas where we can work together,” Tillerson said during a visit to New Zealand in June. “The president has been clear to me: ‘Do not let what’s happening over here in the political realm prevent you from the work you need to do in this relationship.’”

Despite Trump’s consistent overtures to Putin, however, U.S.-Russia relations have not improved since he took office.

Putin has strongly denied any interference in the 2016 election and has accused U.S. politicians of Cold War-era hysteria. Meanwhile, Russia’s continued support for Syrian President Bashar ­al-Assad’s massacre of his own citizens in the country’s civil war has further engendered distrust among U.S. political leaders.

Paul Saunders, who directs the U.S.-Russia program at the Center for the National Interest, said the level of mutual distrust and hostility is as bad as it was during the height of the Cold War.

“Without progress on Ukraine, I don’t see how one would ease sanctions,” he said. “And it’s not like Russia is going to send special forces to Damascus to arrest Assad and deliver him to The Hague or to President Trump.”

[Inside Trump’s anger and impatience — and his decision to fire Comey]

Trump, who has been criticized for his overly warm posture toward Putin, has not indicated how he will approach the meeting this week.

In recent months, Trump has done little to hide his frustration that his effort to pivot toward Russia has been hampered by congressional and FBI investigations, which he views as a “witch hunt” being carried out by his political enemies.

At an Oval Office meeting with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak in May, Trump complained to the Russians about the ongoing probes into his campaign, suggesting that his firing of the FBI director, James B. Comey, would ease the political pressure on his administration.

“I faced great pressure because of Russia,” Trump told the men, according to the New York Times. “That’s taken off.”

Since that meeting, Trump’s Russia-related troubles have only gotten worse. Shortly after Trump met with the Russian officials, special counsel Robert S. Mueller III was appointed to take over the Russia investigation and is now investigating whether Trump sought to obstruct the case by firing Comey, officials have told The Washington Post.

In light of the continued pressure from both parties, White House aides have sought to play down expectations for this first engagement between the two world leaders. But they have offered few clues about what will be on Trump’s agenda, including whether he plans to raise the issue of Russia’s election interference.

“There’s no specific agenda,” national security adviser H.R. ­McMaster said last week when asked whether Trump planned to confront Putin. “It’s really going to be whatever the president wants to talk about.

“As the president has made it clear, he’d like the United States and the entire West to develop a more constructive relationship with Russia,” McMaster added. “But he’s also made clear that we will do what is necessary to confront Russia’s destabilizing behavior.”

There is also a risk that Trump could choose to freelance in the meeting, diverting from the more balanced objectives that his advisers have laid out for the bilateral relationship. If Trump prioritizes his desire to build camaraderie with Putin as he has with other world leaders, it may put him at a stark disadvantage with a former KGB operative known for his ­unflagging focus on Russia’s primacy.

“He has a tendency to ad-lib in these kinds of things,” said former U.S. ambassador to Russia Michael McFaul. “He’s overly focused on ‘having a good meeting.’ He wants to be liked, and he wants to say things are successful.

“He should know and we should understand: Putin is coming with an agenda,” added McFaul, who served under President Barack Obama. “Putin is going to be prepared. If you are going to freelance it, doesn’t mean he’s going to. He is a very effective interlocutor.”

Morello reported from Washington.

ColinColin

Illinois Senate Minority Leader Bill Brady (R-Bloomington), right, listens to the brief debate on a package of budget bills passed July 4 at the Capitol in Springfield, Ill. (Rich Saal/AP)

The Illinois Senate voted to override Gov. Bruce Rauner’s vetoes of a $36 billion budget package Tuesday, including a $5 billion tax increase designed to start digging out of the nation’s longest budget crisis since at least the Great Depression.

The Democratic-controlled chamber completed its work within 30 minutes of the Republican governor’s vetoes, sending the package back to the House for an override vote that would give Illinois its first annual budget since 2015.

The House did not plan to take up the action Tuesday.

“The package of legislation fails to address Illinois’ fiscal and economic crisis — and in fact, makes it worse in the long run,” the first-term governor wrote after his veto of the tax-increase bill. “It does not balance the budget. It does not make nearly sufficient spending reductions.”

Rauner acted about three hours after the Senate voted to hike the personal income-tax rate by 32 percent, from 3.75 percent to just under 5 percent. Corporations would pay 7 percent instead of just over 5 percent.

“We are at a moment in time. We are faced today with the fierce urgency of now,” said the tax-increase legislation’s sponsor, state Sen. Toi Hutchinson (D) of Olympia Fields. “We don’t have any more time. And too late is not good enough.”

The House approved the tax increase with 72 votes Sunday, one more than necessary, with the help of 15 Republicans. Whether they will continue to defy Rauner remains to be seen. House Speaker Michael Madigan (D) told WICS-TV that there would be no House action Tuesday.

Rauner promised to veto the tax measure because Democrats who control the General Assembly have not agreed to resolve his pet issues, including statewide property-tax relief, cost reductions in workers’ compensation and benefits for state-employee pensions, and an easier process for dissolving or eliminating local governments.

“It’s regrettable that I stand here today not capable of being able to support this package, not because what’s in the package is bad but because it’s incomplete,” said the Senate’s newly minted minority leader, Bill Brady (R) of Bloomington. “We need a comprehensive budget package with reforms.”

If Rauner does not like the tax plan, the financial world does. On Monday, two of the nation’s top credit-ratings agencies signaled it would be a good idea for Rauner to accept the results. Fitch Ratings and S&P Global Ratings, having earlier threatened to move Illinois’ creditworthiness into “junk” status without swift action to approve a budget, smiled favorably on the financial outlook.

Democrats and Republicans have negotiated the issues that Rauner considers outstanding in the two weeks since the special session began. But the GOP claims talks broke down over the weekend in advance of Madigan calling the budget votes. Madigan said Monday that those talks were ongoing.

“We’ll continue to work with the Republicans on those issues until they’re resolved,” Madigan said.

ColinColin

